We certainly look forward to taking people to space, certainly. In some respects, yes. I think we're around 16 or 17 hundred.What the Roadster's greatest value is, really, is breaking the misconceptions around electric cars. Showing that you can have a fast, cool, beautiful electric car that goes long distances. Almost 250 miles . That's longer than any electric car in history and, in fact, Roadster's set many world records in terms of its range. In fact, we've had one customer take it over 300 miles on a trip. There's actually two customers. One was a rally in Australia, which is technically 500 km, and it's the first time that an electric car has finished that rally without recharging, and another one was in Europe. I certainly know several of them, but Larry Page and Sergey Brin were both early customers and, in fact, investors in Tesla.The biggest impact of the Roadster is in changing the perception of electric cars and showing that you can do amazing things with an electric car that, in fact, are better than gasoline cars in a lot of respects. The Roadster has better acceleration than almost any gasoline sports car. The result of the Roadster was, in fact, the Volt. Bob Lutz at General Motors credits Tesla with the inspiration for the Volt.We do share our technology, ironically not with General Motorsnot that we weren't willing to do so, but General Motors wanted to go their own way. But we do provide our power train technology to Daimler, for Mercedes and Smart, and to Toyota, and so we have the electrical Mercedes A-class on-road now in Europe and the electric Smart now in the US and Europe and next year there will be the electric turbo Rav-4.Next year we'll have the Model-S which is about half the price of the Roadster which about $50,000 and that's a full size sedan about the size of a 5-series BMW but actually far more capable than other premium sedans. I think we will have a version that accelerates comparable to the Roadster. Our goal with the Model-S is to have a performance version Model-S that is the fastest sedan on the road. It's one hell of a golf cart. You go on the golf course with this puppy, you're really going to have a good time between the holes. They are, and that's exactly what we're trying to effect, is to show peoplehey, you can have ahell, a better experience with an electric car than you can with a gasoline car. It actually is. Even if you draw electricity from coal or natural gas, or even directly from oil, because stationary power plants are so much more efficient than small gasoline engines in cars, an electric car ends up getting more range for a given amount of say, coal or oil that's burned than a gasoline gets. So, in other words, the CO2 per mile is actually less for an electric car even if it's coming from a high CO2 source like coal. Now, of course, long term we have to find sustainable power generation and sustainable transportation but both sides of the equation need to be solved and even if electric cars weren't there, we still need to get sustainable power generation. The great thing about electric cars is you can generate the electricity from a wide range of renewable sources like hydro, geothermal, wind, solar and nuclear where it's save to do so. Now, if that were true, it would be a valid criticism. First, I should say, the loan the Tesla received did not come from stimulus funds at all. In fact, the loan program under which Tesla competed for loans was actually created and signed into law by George Bush. It is tax payer dollars, but it’s very very different from the stimulus funds or the bailouts or anything. In fact, one of the requirements under the loans program, which is called the Advanced Technology Vehicle Manufacturing program, that you had to demonstrate viability as a company independent of the loan. This is why General Motors and Chrysler didn’t receive any funding under this program, because it’s difficult to make that argument while you’re in bankruptcy. No, but we could demonstrate viability with the Roadster. We did not need the loan. The value of the loan was really to accelerate the progress at Tesla, not to keep Tesla alive. Although unfortunately, the timing was unfortunate. So it’s fair that people would have a misunderstanding about this because the announcement of the loan that Tesla gotand also, Nissan and Ford got loans that were much larger than what Tesla gotat the same time, but these loans were announced right around the time that there were bailouts taking place and there was a stimulus and so people naturally confused the two which is unfortunate but they’re really quite different. That is also an incorrect perception. The loan that we received was specifically for the Model-S program which is much higher volume, lower costabout $50,000. We expect to go into production in the middle of next year. 20,000 units per year. A few other things which are noteworthy about the ATVM loan, of course, we pay interest, it’s a reduced interest, but we still pay interest and if we don’t pay the loan off early, there are actually stock warrants that the government gets in Tesla. So, it’s a pretty good deal. You know, we are really hell belt on accelerating the advent of electric cars, and getting electric cars to the mass market as soon as possible.  It certainly helps and we’ll take a lot of heat if it’s in support of the greater cause, and we did take a lot of heat. I think in terms of the editorial page and the criticism that we received, I think it was simply we didn’t have an opportunity to correct some of the mis-perceptions. If, Homer Jenkins, or others had actually understood the correct situation I don’t think they would have been nearly as critical.  We exchanged some emails. I think it’s really going to come from the whole industry moving towards electrification. I’m a supporter of any move by any company to create electric vehicles. So I think it’s great what Nissan is doing with the Leaf, what GM is doing with the Volt, what Daimler is doing with the electric Mercedes.  Well, I guess they’re competition in a sense, but pretty indirectly. It’s such a huge market. We don’t see people necessarily choosing to buy a Volt or a Leaf rather than a Tesla, so I guess technically competition but not in a significant way. The overarching goal of Tesla is to get the industry to move towards electrificationcompetition or notand whether we do that with our own cars, with cars that we help other people make, as we’re doing with Daimler, we’re producing battery packs and chargers for the Mercedes A-class, for the electric Smart car or with Toyota, we’re producing the entire electric power train for the electric Rav-4, we’re just trying to move the industry towards electrification faster than it might otherwise go and we’re certainly quite pleased whenever there’s any announcement about another manufacturer producing electric cars. I certainly believe that the future is pure electric cars, not hybrids. I think hybrids are an interim step. They’re sort of like an amphibian. You know, when life was going from the oceans to land, probably a lot of amphibians, but that’s not the end solution. I think you want to go all electric because that is the truly sustainable path and I think if you split the baby and you have a car that is trying to be a good gasoline car and a good electric car, you end up being not as compelling as either a pure gasoline car or pure electric. With Model-S I think we’ve got a great solution in that regard because you’ve got a range of up to 300 miles. You can actually charge the car in 45 minutes. The charger is built into the car, and the third thing is you can actually swap out the battery pack faster than you can fill a gas tank. So you can actually swap the battery pack out in under a minute. I just think that a future where humanity is a spacefaring civilization out there exploring the stars is an incredibly exciting future and inspiring and so that’s what we’re trying to help make happen. “I really want SpaceX to help make life multi-planetary. I’d like to see a self-sustaining base on Mars.”  I think it’s possible, absolutely.  I think we’ll probably put a first man into space in about 3 years. We’re going all the way to Mars I think.  Best case, 10 years. Worst case, 15 to 20 years.  We want to be like the shipping company that brought people from Europe to America. Or like the Union Pacific railroad or something like that. Our goal is to facilitate the transfer of people and cargo to other planets, and then it’s going to be up to the people if they want to go. He did interview me, I guess, I met with Robert Downey Jr just before they were filming Ironman 1. Gave him a tour of the rocket factory. Showed him an electric car and everything. We talked about some of the possible scientific explanations for the powers that Ironman has in his suit. Like maybe you could harness the power of dark energy or something. I thought it was cool, but I think there’s also some important differences. I’ve got five kids and Ironman is sort of a swinging bachelor. I spend my weekends going to Disney Land and I don’t see Tony Stark doing that. They’re rerunning that? I don’t believe it. That sucks. That’s horrendous. I don’t know, I wish it wasn’t. I think my ex-wife is sort ofshe’s a prolific blogger and writer and, you know, I think she likes to talk about these things and I don’t. I decline to participate in divorce wars, as enticing as that sounds.Alright thanks.What this represents is the official opening of SpaceX Seattle. It is intended to be a significant engineering campus. It's going to be the focus of SpaceX's satellite development activities. In LA we have the rocket development and our Dragon spacecraft, but this is going to be the center of our satellite development activities. What we want to do for satellites is revolutionize the satellite side of things, just as we've done with the rocket side of things. And I should also say it's possible for you to do both, so if you end up working at SpaceX Seattle, you can also work on rockets and manned spacecraft as well as satellites. It's not exclusively one or the other, but in terms of the center of gravity, for satellites will be here in Seattle. The reason for it is pretty straight forward. There's a huge amount of talent in the Seattle area and a lot of you guys don't seem to want to move to LA. It has its merits, by the way. So instead, we're going to establish a significant operation here.I want to tell you a little bit about what we want to achieve with the satellites and why that's important. The satellites constitute as much, or more, of the cost of a space-based activity as the rockets do. Very often actually, the satellites are more expensive than the rocket. So, in order for us to really revolutionize space, we have to address both satellites and rockets. We're going to start off by building our own constellation of satellites but that same satellite bus and the technology we develop can be also be used for Earth science and space science, as well as other potential applications that others may have. So, we're open to both building our own as well aswe're definitely going to build our own but it's something we're going to be able to offer to others.The focus is going to be on creating a global communications system. This is quite an ambitious effort. We're really talking about something which is, in the long term, like rebuilding the Internet in space. The goal will be to have the majority of long distance Internet traffic go over this network and about 10% of local consumer and business traffic. So that's, still probably 90% of people's local access will still come from fiber but we'll do about 10% business to consumer direct and more than half of the long distance traffic.As you guys may know, the speed of light in vacuum is somewhere 40% to 50% faster than in fiber. So you can actually do long distance communication faster if you route it through vacuum than you can if you route it through fiber. It can also go through far fewer hops. Let's say you want to communicate from Seattle to South Africa. If you look at the actual path it takes, it's extremely convoluted. It'll follow the outline of the continents. It'll go through 200 routers and repeaters and the latency is extremely bad. Whereas, if you did it with a satellite network, you could actually do it in two or three hops. Well, maybe four hops. It depends on the altitude of the satellites and what the cross-links are. But basically, let's say, at least an order of magnitude fewer repeaters or routers and then going through space at 50% faster speed of light. So it seems from a physics standpoint inherently better to do the long distance Internet traffic through space.And then space is also really good for sparse connectivity. If you've got a large mass of land where they're relatively low density of users, space is actually ideal for that. It would also be able to serve as, like I said, probably about 10% of people in relatively dense urban/suburban environmentscases where people have been stuck with Time Warner or Comcast or something this would provide an opportunity to do . It's something that would both provide optionality for people living in advanced countries/economies as well as people living in poorer countries that don't even have electricity or fiber or anything like that. So it's a real enabler for people in poor regions of the world and it gives optionality for people in wealthier countries. It's something that I think definitely needs to be done, and it's a really difficult technical problem to solve. So that's why we need the smartest engineering talent in the world to solve the problem.At the same time, we also need to make sure we don't create SkyNet. Ironically, the server room at SpaceX jokingly was called SkyNet. Fate has a great sense of irony. We really need to make sure that doesn't come true. I think, because I'm talking to a technical audience, I can say that if there's some AI apocalypse it's going to come from some collection of vast server farms terrestrially based, not via the space based communication system. I did think about that though.Anyway, I think that this is a fundamentally good thing to do. I can't think of any major downsides. I think it's an important thing to do. It should happen and I think that it is something where, properly designed, it could give people gigabit level access, 20 to 30ms latency, everywhere on Earth. That would be pretty great. That same system we could leverage to put into a constellation on Mars, because Mars is going to need a global communications system too and there's no fiber optics or wires or anything on Mars. We're definitely going to need that. We're going to need high bandwidth communications between Earth and Mars. So I think a lot of what we do in developing an Earth-based communication system could be leveraged for Mars as well. Crazy as that may sound.So yeah, that's the basic story and I'd encourage you to spread the word and tell people about it that you think are great. As I said, the office is going to grow slowly at first. We're not going to hire a zillion people. So, if at first SpaceX doesn't respond to you, or something, please come back again in the future. It's just really hard to add 500 people all at once and have that be good. We are going to grow and make this a very significant SpaceX Seattle campus but we want to do so very carefully by adding the right expertise at the right time. So, like I said, if for no reason you don't get a response becauseI don't know, our recruiting team is deluged or something like that, please reapply in like six months and don't take any offense by that. We're just trying to grow in a careful and considered way.Okay, I'm happy to take some questions from you guys if you want to just yell out some questions.I wouldn't worry too much about the space junk thing. Actually, we should worry about ourselves creating the space junk, but at the altitude in question there's really not a lot out there. We're talking about something about the 1100 km level and there's just not a lot up there. The thing we need to make sure of is that we obviously.. we don't want to create any issues. So we're going to make sure that we can deal with the satellites effectively and have them burn up on reentry and have the debris kind of land in the Pacific somewhere. That's what we need to make sure of, because the number of satellites we're talking about here is ultimately around 4000. Actually, technically, the number under discussion was 4025 but there's probably false precision there. That's kind of what we're thinking right now. There's less than half that number of active satellites currently in existence. So this will be more than double the number of currently active satellites.Timing.. yeah. In the past I've been a little optimistic on schedule. So, I'm trying to recalibrate, but I'm thinking we should be able to get version one active in about five years. That wouldn't be the full half of long distance and 10% of all Earth's connectivity, but a useful version one that has global coverage, except at the poleswe're aiming for about five years. Then there would be successive versions every two or three years after that. To get to where the system is really at full capability, I think it's probably 12 to 15 years. But yeah, major revisions certainly every five years, maybe a little sooner than that. If you figure in terms of major revisions, version one in five years, version two maybe five years after that, version three five years after that, is a rough time line.It's going to be, I think, quite a lot of software. Like, all in software and firmware it's probably half of the office. It's probably half software, half firmwaresorry, half software/firmware, half hardware. That seems likeand then over time the software might actually exceed the hardware number because it's justif you have something that's highly configurable then it tends to, over time, weigh towards the software.This would be not using cubesats. Satellites we have in mind are going to be quite sophisticated. They'd be a smallish satellite but with big satellite capability. By smallish I mean, in the few hundred kilogram range.Well, it can't be free, because then we'd go out of business. No it can't be free to the user, I don't think so. I mean, this would cost a lot to build. I mean, ultimately over time, the full version of the system, we're talking about something that would be $10 or $15 billion to create, maybe more. Then, the user terminals will be at least $100 to $300 depending on which type of terminal. This is intended to be a significant amount of revenue and help fund a city on Mars. Looking in the long term, and saying what's needed to create a city on Mars? Well, one thing's for sure: a lot of money. So we need things that will generate a lot of money.Yeah, we're not going toyeah. Spectrum that is omni-directional and wall penetrating, that spectrum is extremely rare, and limited. Spectrum that is not wall penetrating and that is very directional, is not rare. It's sort of the difference between a laser beam and a floodlight. You can have lots of laser beams, in limit that would be a real tight beam communication. Whereas there's high scarcity for cellular bandwidth, there is not high scarcity for space to earth bandwidth. As long as it's not roof penetrating. So I don't seen bandwidth as being a particularly difficult issue.Compared to the Iridium Satellites which was a mere 70, we’re talking more than an order of magnitude larger volume. This is something I don’t think we’reI mean, there may be some similarities to the way the Iridium network was done but we would havein terms of the production waste produced, it would be similar to the way a car is produced or consumer electrics. So, if we take things even a step further, if a satellite didn’t work you’d just take it out of the constellation and deorbit it. As opposed to going through this super-intense acceptance procedure to make sure the satellite works. Normally the way satellites are done is they’re like Battlestar Galacticathere’s like one of them and it’s really giant and if this thing doesn’t work it’s terrible, like the whole business collapses. But if you have a large constellation, you can afford to lose individual satellites and it doesn’t affect the constellation very much. An analogy might be between, say, mainframes and PCs. If you want to have a big data center serving millions of people, it’s way better to have an array of cheap PCs then it is to have a few mainframes. Basically that’s how the Internet is served, with millions of PCs on racks instead of mainframes.Teaming with local propulsion companies? Not really. I don’t think so. We’re going to build our own propulsion unit. People in the space industry have a really difficult time manufacturing things. They’re pretty good at designing them in the first place but they don’t actually know how to make them in volume. It’s possible we could license some technology or something but the main propulsion system we have in mind for the satellite is a Hall effect thruster which, not to trivialize it too much, is basically like a loud speaker, okay. It’s like a magnetic field accelerating ions, it’s pretty easy to make. I mean, there’s degrees of Hall thruster, like how good it is, but at the end of the day it’s not that hard. So it’s not clear that it would make sense to outsource something that’s not that hard.There’s multiple elements to the regulatory things. There’s the ITU filings and the financial qualifications you need, and we’ve done the filings associated with that. That says whether you can actually put the satellite network up. Then there’s thewhether it’s legal to have a ground link. Obviously any given country can say it’s illegal to have a ground link. From our standpoint we could conceivably continue to broadcast and they’d have a choice of either shooting our satellites down.. or not. China can do that. So we probably shouldn’t broadcast there. If they get upset with us, they can blow our satellites up. I mean, I’m hopeful that we can structure agreements with various countries to allow communication with their citizens but it is on a country by country basis. I don’t think it’s something that would affect the time line. At least, it’s not going to take longer than five years to do that. Not all countries will agree at first. There will always be some countries that don’t agree. That’s fine.Okay, this would be a low Earth orbit constellation, so it would actually be moving quite a bit.The base station would have a phase array antenna with a switching time that’s of the microsecond to low millisecond level. So it would only take a few milliseconds seconds to switch from one satellite to the next. So, as opposed to having a dish that has a slew rate.How do you power satellites? With solar panels, and then batteries for low Earth orbit satellites because they go through Earth’s shadow then you have to have batteries to handle when they’re in shadow. Yep.Umm, biggest concern about success, well, I think it’s important to assume that terrestrial networks will get much better over time. Ya know, one of the mistakes that Teledesic made was not assuming that terrestrial networks would get much better over time. So we need to make sure that the system we design is good, even taking into account significant improvements in the terrestrial systems, but I do think there’s an important difference between what we’re doing and say Teledesic. In the case of Teledesic they were trying to talk to phones and that gets back to that problem of a roof penetrating situation and particularly with a signal that’s coming from space. If you’re in a skyscraper it’s got to go through 27 floors to reach you, it’s not going to happen. There’s nothing that will, ya know short of like a neutrino, but you’re not going to have a neutrino phone. In the case of Teledesic, I think they had some fundamental issues there.I think we’re going to have to pay a lot of attention to security. It would really be unfortunate if it got hacked and taken over. That would be bad. Whether it was by AI or by some group of whatever. I think it’s going to be important to have some sort of low level ROM chip that’s got a code that you can likego into a safe mode. So, it’s like listening for a code, and then that ROM chip can’t be updated. So we could always trigger a safe mode situation to regain control of the system but it’s going to require a lot of thought to make sure we are able to protect it from any hacking attempts. But it’s much like Google or Facebook.. they handle these kinds of issues.I’ll try to answer a few questions in the back there.I think we won’t take SpaceX public for a very long time. What I’ve said is: when we’re doing regular flights to Mars, that might be a good time to go public. But, before then, because the long term goals of SpaceX are really long term, likeit takes a long time to build a city on Marsthat doesn’t match with the short term time frame of public shareholders and portfolio managers that are looking at the sort of two to four year time horizon. So I think we’ll need to hold off going public for a while. Now, that said, what we do do is we do offer stock options and restricted stock and we do liquidity events every six months. So, we have the company valued by an outside firm every six months and we will do stock buybacks every six months. It sort of, I think, gets the best of both worlds where you have stock liquidity but you don’t have the massive fluctuations that you have with a public company where at any given weeklike, for example with Tesla, with any given week it’s like dealing with a manic depressive. It’s very confusing. I’ll say things that I think if people understand what I’m saying the stock should go up, but it goes down, like what the hell, and vice versa. I think it’s actually quite distracting to have public stock and the time to go public, ideally, is where things are fairly stable. Then we will go public, but like I said, I think we get the benefits of stock appreciation over time without the downside of going public, and then we’ll go public maybe twenty years from now or something like that.There needs to be some sort of architecture for establishing a city on Mars, which means huge numbers of people and ultimately millions of tons of cargo. How do we do that? It really comes down to an economic question. Which isthere’s some economic activation energy, a cost-per-unit-mass to the surface of Mars, at which point we’d have a self-sustaining civilization there, but beyond which we would not. It’s up to debate about how much that might be, but I think at a personal level there needs to be enough of an intersection of sets of people who can afford to move to Mars and people who want to move to Mars. If those two coincide then there will be a colony, otherwise there will not be a colony. I will eventually go to Mars. …But to put that in concrete terms, it needs to be at least a half a million dollars or less to move to Mars, I think. Ideally much less, ya know, but if it’s much more than that then there probably won’t be a colony. So that’s the basic idea. What I hope to present, hopefully towards the end of this year, is a transport architecture that I think could achieve that number. There’s a big difference between thinking that I can achieve that number and actually achieving that number. There’s lots of people who suggested, ‘hey, wouldn’t it be a good idea to go the Moon?’, but much harder to actually go to the Moon. It’s a hard execution problem. In fact, I think with most ideas it’s the execution is really the hard part, and in order to make it happen you have to have lots of talented people working together towards a common goal to achieve that. That’s what I want to put together at SpaceX.Alright, thanks everyone.Thank you very much for the award.It's great to be before so many people who believe strongly in the establishment of life on Mars.I think my reason for being interested in Mars and doing SpaceX are really.. they come down to basically just two things. One, which the prior speaker was articulating is, the defensive reasonin that if we are on more than one planet, the probable lifespan of human civilization and the life of consciousness as we know it, is going to be far greater than if we are on one planet. So there's that defensive reason, that life insurance reason, and I think that's obviously a very important thing. Earth's been around for 4 billion years and civilization about 10 thousand years and it's only now that we have this littlethis little window has just cracked open where it's possible for life to extend beyond Earth and soI think it's sort of sensible to take advantage of that window while it's open. Hopefully it will be open for a long time but it could be open for a short time, and so we should take action. And that's sort of the defensive reason.It's not actually the reason that gets me most fired up about Mars.. The thing that actually gets me the most excited about it is that I just think it's the grandest adventure I could possibly imagine. It's the most exciting thingI couldn't think of anything more exciting, more fun, more inspiring for the future than to have a base on Mars and it would be incredibly difficult and probably lots of people will die and terrible and great things will happen along the way, just as happened in the formation of the United States. But it will be one of those things that is incredibly inspiring and we must have inspiring things in the world. Life cannot just be about solving this problem or that problem, there must be things that when you wake up in the morning you're glad to be alive, and that I think is, to me, the most important reason we should pursue the establishment of life on Mars.Now, of course, I'm preaching to the converted here. I expect to hear few objections from this audience. So, I think really, what matters is find a way to do it. In fact, I'll give you a little bit of background of my genesis of how I got into space. Sort of started when I was college, there were three areas that I thought would most effect the future of humanity and space explorationextension of life beyond Earth was one of those things. I didn't ever expect to be involved in it, because I thought it was the province of governments and besides which, it sort of seemed at least 21, 22 years ago that it was likely to occur because we went to the Moon and then of course there would be people going to Mars and then we'd be establishing a base on the Moon and eventually a base on Mars and that sort of seemed like the natural progression of things. And then amazingly it didn't happen. I kept thinking, well, it's about to happen. And again, it just didn't happen. There's a Monty Python skit about this. Suddenly, nothing happened Before you know it, nothing happened.In fact, in approximately 2001 I was with a good friend of mine from college, my college housemate actually, in New York and he asked me what I was going to do after Paypal and I said well, I've always been interested in space but of course there's nothing that I as an individual could do about that, but the question got me curious as to sort-of, to find out what, okay when are we sending people to Mars? So, after I got back to my hotel room I went to the NASA website to see, sort-of, to look up the schedule. Because, of course, there had to be a schedule. And I couldn't find it. I thought the problem was me. Because, of course, it must be here somewhere on this website, but just well hidden. And it turned out it wasn't on the website at all. Which was shocking.So then I thought, well, perhaps the reason is that the American people have lost the will to explore or if we just got people more excited or interested in the subject then they'd be inclined to want to do it. This turned out to be a false premise, by the way, but that was my initial thought. It was a mistake. At first I thought that if we can do a small philanthropic mission to Marssomething that would get the public excited, then that would result in a bigger budget for NASA and then we could do exciting things and get the ball rolling again. And that's about the time I started talking to Robert Zubrin and a few other people andso initially, the thought was to send a small greenhouse to the surface of Mars with seeds in dehydrated nutrient gel. They'd be hydrated upon landing and then you'd have this little greenhouse on the surface of Mars and the public tends to be, as they should, interested in things that are precedent and superlatives. So this would be the furthest that life has ever traveled, the first life on Mars and then you'd have this great money shot of green plants on a red background. So that would beI thought that could get people pretty excited, and so, I started investigating what they would take, and I was able to get the cost of the spacecraft down to low single-digit millions and cost of communications down and I was able to get everything compressed, except for the cost of the rocket.The US rockets were way too expensive. Something like a Delta II would have cost $60 million and I figured we needed to do two parallel missions, two identical missions, in case there was an equipment failure because then it could be counterproductivelike, look at that fool, he did that Mars mission and it didn't work, now we definitely can't do Mars. So I figured we had to have redundant missions, and I just didn't actually have enough money from the sale of Paypal, from my stake in the sale of Paypal, to actually do that. I just didn't have enough money. So I went to Russia in late 2001, early 2002 to try to buy ICBMs. And that's as crazy as it sounds. So I guess, about 30 years old, Internet guy arrives in Moscow, wants to buy the biggest ICBM in the Russian rocket fleet. I said, I don't need the nuke. Just need the rocket. And then, they thought I was crazy, but then they also thought, well, he's got money so that'sso I was actually able to negotiate a deal to buy a couple of Dneprs andnow, at the end of all that I decided not to conclude the deal. So, negotiated a price but decided not to take the deal, because after my third trip to Russia that's about the time that I realized that my original premise was wrong.That it is in factwe do not lack the will. Particularly in the United States, perhaps the world as a whole, but particularly not the United States does not lack the will to explore. Not in the least. In fact, the United States is a distillation of the human spirit of exploration. Almost everyone came here from somewhere else. You couldn't ask for a group of people that are more interested in exploring the frontier. Butpeople don't think there is any way to do it, if they don't think there's a means, then it's somewhat irrelevant. You know, you're not going to bash your head against a brick wall if you're confident that your head won't break before the wall will break. It's just not going to happen.So that's when I decided to start the rocket company, because it was clear that we had not made advancements in rocket technology and that was the reason that we hadn't made progress. The rocket technology was actually going worse. It was costing more and more to send things to space than in the past. So we had a negative technology curve. Which is counter intuitive because we're so used to things in the consumer electronics realm, and in everyday life, improving. You know, we sort-of take it for granted, like it's as though things automatically improve. They do not automatically improve They only improve with lots of effort and resources. You saw the picture of pyramids there, Egyptian civilization got to the point where it could create things like the great pyramid of Cheops but then lost that ability and never got it back. Or Roman civilization went through a deep dark period. It's not a given that things improve. There has to be a forcing function. People have to do it.So anyway, I started SpaceX. I had many people try to convince me not to start the company. Really tried their best. Many of my closest friends if there was anything they could have done to stop me from starting a rocket company, they would have done it. One good friend of mine compiled footage of rocket failures, and forced me to watch it. I said I’ve seen them all. It was certainlybut I think that they perhaps misunderstood the premise because when I started SpaceX it was not with the expectation of success. I thought that the most likely outcome was failure. But given that the thing I was going to do previously which was the Mars greenhouse mission, I’d expected that would have 100% likelihood of losing all the money associated with it. So if a rocket company has less than 100% chance of losing all the money associated with it then it was therefore quite a bit less risky than the thing I’d been doing before.Fortunately, things went reasonably well with SpaceXnot at the beginning. The first three launched of the Falcon 1 rocket that we did failed. And, as Bob Zubrin was saying, it’s not a good day when the rocket fails. The first rocket failed onlyit impacted only 60 seconds after liftoff. Not far from the launch site. Me and the rest of the team spent all of that day picking up pieces of the rocket. Which is a very sad thing. But we picked them up to see if it could help figure out what went wrong. Fortunately, the fourth launch we were able to reach orbit. That’s a good thingit was a good thing we were able to do that because I had no more money left.Talulah, my wife there, she’s witness to the third and then the fourth launch. Yeah, I was so stressed out at the fourth launch, I didn’t even actually feel elation. I just felt relief. So, it was a very very close call, but fortunately the fourth launch worked and since then all of the launches have worked. I hope they continue to work, and SpaceX has gotten a lot stronger and we’ve actually been slightly profitable for the last 4 years approximately, and should be again this year, and the rockets now are much bigger. We’ve got Falcon 9 which is about a million pound thrust rocket. And we’ve got an upgraded version of Falcon 9 which is going to launch next year, which will be almost 1.5 million pounds of thrust. And then, the Falcon Heavy which will be over 4 million pounds of thrust, which is about 60% that of a Saturn V. In fact, with two Falcon Heavy launches you could actually send people back to the surface of the Moon. Most people probably aren’t quite away of the scale of the rocket that we’re building. Falcon Heavy should launch, probably around the end of next year or certainly by early 2014 by the latest. That I think will represent a significant improvement in rocket technology, and then, very importantly, we’re also working on re-usability.If you really boil it down to the crux of why don’t we have a base on Mars, as I mentioned, there’s rocket technology but what really needs to be developedthe key invention that’s necessaryis a rapidly and completely reusable rocket. This is a very difficult thing to do on Earth because Earth’s gravity is quite high. It’s right on the cusp of impossibility for such a thing for a chemical rocket. So if you take an expendable rocket, even after a lot of smart people are using advanced materials, and really approaching the limits of engine efficiency and everything, you’ll typically get 2 to 3% of your liftoff mass to orbit. That’s for an expendable rocket. Now, if you say okay, we want to make it reusable, we want to bring it back to the launch site, it’s gotta survive the rigors of reentry, all the systems have got to be capable of surviving multiple firings and thermal fatigue and it’s just reallyyou add a lot of mass when that happens. Previously, when people have tried to make a reusable system, they found that they would get some portion of the way and conclude that success was not one of the possible outcomes.In government programs, of course, that program will still continue for quite some time. It’s funny but true. The real trick then, is to say can you create a rocket that is efficient enough that, in an expendable form, you can push that, what would normally be 2 to 3% of mass to orbit, up to maybe 4% of mass to orbit and then if then you can get really good about the reusable elements, maybe that can only cost you 2 of those four points. So on net, you would still get 2%, roughly, of your liftoff mass to orbit. That’s the thing that needs to happen. In order for that to happen, you have to really get straight A across the board in all elements of the rocket design. Every little tiny thing. The engine efficiency, thrust to weight, the engine, the tank mass, the pressurant mass, the secondary structure, the wiring, the weight of the computers, everything matters immensely. But if you do all those things right, then it is possible to make this work, and this is what has given me hope recently in the last few years. Because I wasn’t sure whether it was possible, but in the last few years I’ve become convinced that it is possible. Of course, just because something is possible doesn’t mean it will occur, but I think it can occur. Success being one of the possible outcomes is very important.That’s the breakthrough that SpaceX is really trying to achieve. The stuff we’ve done so far is good, I think it’sbut it’s evolutionary, it’s not revolutionary, and we really need the revolutionary thing to work. So I think over the next few years we’ll see if we’re going to be able to do that rapid and reusability thing. But I am quite optimistic that this will occur. I don’t want to leave any doubt, I’m quite optimistic that it will occur.That’s for Earth orbit, now to establish life on Mars, I think you really ultimately need to be able to carry millions of people there and millions of tons of cargo. You really need a fully reusable Mars transportation system, which is yet a more difficult step than creating a fully reusable Earth system, and that I was really worried would not be possible. But, last year, I became convinced that it actually is possible. Which made me very happy actually. In fact, I think Talulah was there when I was pacing around the bedroom late at night trying to see if this would work.Yeah, so that’s good news. Now, I could be deluded. But unless I’m deluded, I think we’ve got something in mind that would be a solution that would work. It really comes down to a cost. What cost does a trip to Mars have to be in order for it to be a self-sustaining reaction? I think you’ve got to roughly get to around half a million dollars. If people could pay half a million dollars to move to Mars, sell all their stuff on Earth, because you don’t need it, then you could move to Mars, then I think that could work because that’s basically the net worth of a roughly middle income earning person after about 25 years in the United States is roughly half a million dollars. In fact, it’s kinda hard to buy a house in southern California for half a million dollars in a lot of neighborhoods. So I think at roughly that level is where it works. That’s where we’ve got to get to, and my calculations show that it should be possible.In fact, it is possible, according to me.. but there’s a great deal of work that has to occur to make it a reality.So that, I think, is a reason to feel good about the possibility of life on Mars. I think that’s probably what I’d like to leave you with, and in the ensuing years we will reveal more and more about what we’re going to do, and there will probably be some ups and downs along the way, but I can finally see a path to that objective.Like I said, so long as I’m not delusion or haven’t made some significant error then I think that will hopefully come as good news to people in this room.Thank you.Alright. Welcome everyone to the announcement of Tesla Energy. What I'm going to talk about tonight is a fundamental transformation of how the world works, about how energy is delivered across Earth. This is how it is todayit's pretty bad. It sucksexactly. I just want to be clear because sometimes people are confused about itthis is real. This is actually how most power is generated, with fossil fuels and if you look at the curvethat's a famous curve, the Keeling curve that shows the growth in CO2 concentration in the atmosphere and every year it ratchets upit gets higher and higher and if we do nothing that's where it's headedto levels that we don't even see in the fossil record. I think we collectively should do something about this and not try to win the Darwin award. For us and a lot of other creatures too. The way the grid works today is you've got coal, natural gas, nuclear, hydro and then wind and solar, but not enough wind and solar obviously. That's the grid typically in most countries and you'll notice somethingthere's quite a big difference in peak to trough usage. The peak usage is typically at least twice the trough usage. Please bare that in mind as I'm going to reference that again later in the presentation. That's an important point.What we're here to talk about is the solution. I actually think it's a fairly obvious solution but it's something that we need to do, and the solution is in two parts. Part one is the Sun. We have this handy fusion reactor in the sky, called the Sun. You don't have to do anything, it just works. It shows up every day and produces ridiculous amounts of power. A lot of people are unclear on how much surface area is needed to generate enough power to completely get the United States off fossil fuels. Most people have no idea, they think that it must be some huge amount of arealike maybe you need these satellites in spacespace solar power, if anyone should be in favor of space solar power it should be mebut this is completely unnecessary, because actually very little land is needed to get rid of all fossil fuel electricity generation in the United States. That blue square there is the land area that's needed to transition the United States to a zero-carbon-emission situation. It's really not much and most of that area is going to be on rooftops. You won't need to disturb land, you won't need to find new areas, it's mostly just going to be on the roofs of existing homes and buildings. I really think that image is an important one to bare in mind when people are thinking about solar powerhow much will it take? Is it going to take some enormous amount? No, it's just that blue square.Now, the obvious problem with solar power is that the Sun does not shine at night. I think most people are aware of this. So, this problem needs to be solved. We need to store the energy that is generated during the day so that you can use it at night, and also even during the day the energy variation varies. There's a lot more energy generated in the middle of the day than at dawn or dusk. So it's very important to smooth out that energy generation and retain enough so that you can use it at night.Now, what you may not have noticed in that earlier slide where I showed the blue square, was that there was one red pixel. In the blue square was a red pixel. We've now zoomed in so that you can see that red pixel. That is the size of the batteries needed to transition all of the United States to being solar with batteries. Okay, it is a very tiny amount. One pixel. Just remember that. One pixel is the size of the batteries needed to bring the United States to have no fossil fuel generated electricity. This is no room at all. Not a problem for solar or batteries.The issue with existing batteries is that they suck. They’re really horrible. They look like that. They’re expensive. They’re unreliable. They’re sort of stinky, ugly, bad in every way, very expensiveyou have to combine multiple systemsthere’s no integrated place you can go and buy a battery that just works. Which is what people really want to buy. We have to come up with a solution. That’s the mission piece. That’s the thing that’s needed to have a proper transition to a sustainable energy world. The missing piece is what we’re going to show you tonight.Alright.This is a product we call the Tesla Powerwall. If you look back against that wall you’ll see a lot of them, in different colors, so you can pick your favorite color, and it looks like a beautiful sculpture on the wall. It’s very importantI want to point a few things that are very important about this. The fact that it’s wall mounted is vital because it means you don’t have to have a battery room. You don’t have to have some room full of nasty batteries. It means that a normal household can mount this on their garage or on the outside wall of their house and it doesn’t take up any room. It’s flat against the wall, it has all of the integrated safety systems, the thermal controls, the DC to AC converter, it’s designed to work very well with solar systems right out of the box and it addresses all the needs.If you’re thinking about buying a battery, what does this provide you? Well, it gives you piece of mind. If there’s a cut in the utilities you’re always going to have power, particularly if you’re in a place that’s very cold. You don’t have to worry about being out of power if there’s an ice storm. You actually could go, if you want, completely off-grid. You can take your solar panels, charge the battery packs and that’s all you use. So it gives you safety, security, and it gives you a complete and affordable solution and the cost of this is $3500. It’s designed so you can stack them on the wall. So if you look at the wall in the back, you’ll see that they’re some that are paired up. So you can have two or you can actually stack up to nine of the Powerwalls. If you’ve got a pretty big thing going on you could have 90 kWhsit’s a lot.Very importantly, this is going to be a great solution for people in remote parts of the world where there’s no electricity wires or where the electricity is extremely intermittent or extremely expensive. So you can take the Tesla Powerwall and it can scale globally. In fact, I think what we’ll see is something similar to what happened with cell phones vs landlines where the cell phones actually leapfrogged the landlines and there wasn’t a need to put landlines in a lot of countries or in remote locations. People in a remote village or an island somewhere can take solar panels, combine it with a Tesla Powerwall and never have to worry about having electricity lines. I think is going to be great. Electricity lines are not the most pretty thing in the world. Being have to have a solution that just works where ever you are, I think is going to be incredibly helpful to people who don’t have electricity today.You can order the Powerwall right now, on the Tesla website. In fact, go to teslaenergy.com and you can by the Tesla Powerwall right now. We’re going to start shipping in approximately three or four months. Initially the ramp will be slow because these packs will be made in our Fremont factory and then next year the ramp will go much much higher as we transition to the Gigafactory in Nevada.So, this is a good solution for homes and perhaps for some small commercial applications, but what about something that scales to much much larger levels? For that, we have something else. We have, the Powerpack. The Tesla Powerpack is designed to scale infinitely. You can literally make this into a GWh class solution. You could go gigawatt class or higherin fact, we already have one utility that wants to do a 250 MWh installation using the Powerpack. I think it’d be a good ideaI think this would be a good time to transition the power that we’re using in the building to being battery power of course. So let’s go to the camera feed tolet’s go check out the power meter. Oh wow, the grid it’s actually zero. This entire night has been powered by batteries. Not only that, the batteries were charged by the solar panels on the roof of this building. “This entire night, everything you’re experiencing is stored sunlight.”When I say scalable, I really mean scalable. We can do gigawatt class installations with the Powerpack. The whole system is literally designed for infinite scalability. We could power a small city, like Boulder with a GWh class pack and we can keep going here. What I want to do is explore what’s really needed to transition the world to sustainable energy. Is this actually possible? Is it something that is within the ability of humanity to actually do or is it some insurmountable super-difficult impossible thing? It’s not. With 160 million Powerpacks you could transition the United States. With 900 million you can transition the world. You can basically make all electricity generation in the world renewable and primarily solar. Then, going a little further, if you want to transition all transport and all electricity generation and all heating to renewable you need approximately two billion Powerpacks. Now that might seem like an insane number and I’m very tempted to do the billion thing thatI must restrain my handbut in order tolike, two billion Powerpacks is that a crazy number? Is that an impossible number? It is not, in fact. The number of cars and trucks that we have on the road is approximately two billion, and every twenty years approximately that gets refreshed. There’s a hundred million new cars and trucks made every year. The point I want to make is that this is actually within the power of humanity to do. We have done things like this before. It is not impossible, it is really something that we can do.“In fact, it’s something that obviously we’re starting to do, with Gigafactory 1. The way we’re approaching the Gigafactory is really like it’s a product. We’re not really thinking of it in the traditional way that people think of a factory. Like, a building with a bunch of off-the-shelf equipment in it. What we’re really designing in the Gigafactory is a giant machine.” It’s actuallythink of it like a product of Tesla. We’re making this really big product that doesn’t happen to movebut it’s really big, and that’s what we’re doingGigafactory version 1. We’re building that in Nevada right now, and there will need to be many Gigafactories in the future. I do want to emphasize that this is not something that we think Tesla is going to do alone. We think that there is going to be many other companies building Gigafactory-class operations of their own and we hope they do and the Tesla policy of open sourcing patents will continue for the Gigafactory, for the Powerpack and for all these other things.We want to show people, most importantly that this is possible. If you look at thatthat’s the future we could have. Where the curve slowly rolls over and goes to zerono incremental CO2that’s the future we need to have. That’s something thatand the path that I’ve talked about, the solar panels and the batteriesit’s the only path that I know of that can do this, and I think it’s something that we must do and that we can do and that we will do.Thank you all for coming tonight and I hope you had a great time.That is water.. tastes like water. Well, I mean, diet coke is good. There’s something that they put in that stuff that isya know, you never get sick of it for some reason. It’s some infernal ingredient.. I’m trying to cut down these days. There was probably times when I had like eight a day or something ridiculous. I think these days it’s probably one or two. So, it’s not anything crazy.  Usually two a day.  Not really. I used to have so much coffee and Diet Coke that I’d get really wired and then I’d get over-caffeinated and it wouldn’t be good. I’m cutting down to, I think, more reasonable portions these days.  Yeah. It’s really varied quite a bit over time. These days it’s probably 80, 85 hours per week. For a while there it was over 100 hours per week and that’s justthat’s a very high amount of pain. The difficulty and pain of work hours really increased exponentially. It’s not linear. When the financial crisis hit in 2008/2009, it was just every day, seven days a week, morning till night and dream about work. It was terrible. Bad dreams.  For me, usually, it’s about 7, but I got to bed late. Usually I go to bed around 1am or so.  That also varies a lot. I think it’s probably true that having a good breakfast is a good idea, but usually I don’t have time for that. Sometimes it’s made for me, but probably half the time I don’t have any breakfast. I’ll have a coffee or something like that.. and a Mars bar, sure.. but I’m trying to cut down on sweet stuff. I think I probably should have an omelet and a coffee or something like that. That seems like the right thing and sometimes I do have that. Lunch is usually served to me during a meeting and I finish it in five minutes. It’s a bad habit. Dinner is where the calories really come into play. If I have dinner meetingsthey’re the worst, you eat enough for two people at those things. You have the appetizer and the main course and all that sort of stuff. Business dinners are like the thing that reallywhere I probably eat way too much. I certainly could be slimmer I think. I work-out once or twice a week. I mean, yeah, once or twice. I should do it more often, for sure.  Run through the forest? No. I usually just do a little bit on the treadmill or lifting some weights, I suppose. Of course definitely not. I certainly have a strong influence, but there are many people at these companies. SpaceX has four thousand people now. Tesla we just passed ten thousand people today. There’s a lot of people who have had a huge impact and influence on building the companies. I’ve had more of an influence than anyone else, but it’s a big team effort from a lot of talented people.  Not for SpaceX. The plan I had when we created Tesla was I thought I would allocate maybe 20 or 30% of my time to Tesla and then for Solar City I figured 5%, 10% of my time, that sort of thing. Solar City turned out to be true. In fact, even better than that. It probably takes me less than 5% of my time on Solar City. Tesla ended up being much more. Unfortunately the first CEO didn’t work out and then I got a temporaryI mean, I tried pretty hard not to be the CEO. Like, I could have been the CEO from day one. I feel that people sometimes don’t realize that, but I just wasn’t able to find the right person. In the case of Solar City, there’s a great team that runs it, but it’s really hard to find someone who can grow a company. Running a company in steady state is much easier than growing a company. With Tesla, as more people joined the team, investors would ask me how long am I going to be CEO and I said, well, I’m committed to be CEO through the high volume production vehicle. Probably three or four years, but at that point I would then have to consider what makes sense. I mean, “I would never leave Tesla ever, but I may not be CEO forever. No-one should be CEO forever.”  No. There’s no plans or anything like that. Right now our plan is just tofor sure, I’m CEO through the production of the Model 3 and the Gigafactory, and then evaluate. 35.  Well, it might be less. It depends on what the exchange rate is, of course. It’s always a bit tricky. In the US, the prices are quoted before sales tax and in Europe it’s with VAT. There’s like a 20% VAT and all that stuff. It would probably be like 30,000 euros, or a little bit less than that.  I’d say three. When I interview someone I really just ask them to tell me the story of their career and what are some of the tougher problems that they dealt with, how they dealt with those, and how they made decisions are key transition points. Usually that’s enough for me to get a very good gut feel about someone and what I’m really looking for is evidence of exceptional ability. Did they face really difficult problems and overcome them? and then of course you want to make sure that if there was some significant accomplishment, were they really responsible or was someone else more responsible, and usually if they’re a person who has had to struggle with a problem, they really understand it, and they don’t forgetit’s really difficult. You can ask them very detailed questions about it and they’ll know the answer, whereas the person who was not truly responsible for that accomplishment will not know the details. There’s no need even to have a college degree, at all, or even high school. I mean, if somebody graduated from a great university that may be an indication that they will be capable of great things but it’s not necessarily the case. If you look at, say, people like Bill Gates, Larry Ellison, Steve Jobs, these guys didn’t graduate from college but if you had a chance to hire them, of course that would be a great idea. Really, I’m looking just for evidence of exceptional ability and if there’s a track record of exception achievement then it’s likely that will continue into the future. Well, those are pretty different personalitiesbetween Gates and Jobs and Ellison. I think all three of those were technologists but with different types of skills. Jobs was obviously very good with aesthetics, and he understood technology of course, but he also understood what people wanted even when they didn’t know themselves, and he wasn’t afraid to break boundaries. Gates would probably be better at raw engineering and technology than Jobs but not as good on aesthetics. For all these guys, they’re obviously very driven, and they’re very talented and they’re able to attract great people to build a company. The ability to attract and motivate great people is critical to the success of a company, because a company is just a group of people that are assembled to build a product or service. That’s the purpose of a company. We can all sometimes forget this elementary truth. If you’re able to get great people to join the company, work together towards the common goal and have a relentless sense of perfection about that goal, then you will end up with a great product, and if you have a great product lots of people will buy it, and then the company will be successful. It’s pretty straightforward really. I suppose I’d like to play a musical instrument, that’d be cool. I can whistle. I kinda have like a whole bunch of songs that kind of randomly. I just whistle randomly. Please don’t ask me to whistle.. like, I can whistle but it’s maybe not the coolest instrument to play. “I can whistle Pachelbel’s Canon, which is a tricky one, but I’m not going to whistle for you now because that’d be too embarrassing.”The reason for SpaceX is I think we need to become a multi-planet species and we were clearly not getting there based on the progress in the space industry and so I started SpaceX to try to solve that problem. That's the overall aspiration. Yeah. If we are not a multi-planet species then the likely probable lifespan of humanity is much less. Plus, it's going to be much more boring, I think.  Right, absolutely, that's just the appetizer.It was very nerve wracking, the first flight to the space station. It was the third flight of our Falcon 9 rocket, so I wasn't perhaps as worried about that, and we had flown our Dragon spacecraft and maneuvered around and reentered, so I knew that the basic spacecraft functionality worked, but we had not tested the proximity operations and berthing system, and there was a bunch of upgrades to the avionics. We went from being mostly single fault tolerant to beingoften no fault tolerant to being too fault tolerant. So it's quite a big increase in the complexity of the avionics software. We also added solar arrays and a radiator. Yeah.  Right, you can sort of try to get a close approximation but you can't get it exactly what it's like to be in zero-g.It was a little worrying at first because the LIDARs would not lock on. As we approach the space station, we scan the space station with a thing kind of like a laser radar. It laser scans the space station and it recreates that model internally in the computer to figure out the relative position and movement of the two. We needed a definite lock, as opposed to an ambiguous lock, and the actual space station is a little different from the model of the space station.  It did, yeah. So, essentially, the computer wasn't 100% sure. It was pretty sure, but not 100% sure that it had a lock on the space station. So, what we were able to do is just upload new software to diagnose the problem and then run that software in simulation on a hardware-in-the-loop version of Dragon that we have on the ground. We have a complete version of Dragon, which includes all the avionics software, vales and everything, and we can run accelerated simulations on that system and verify that it would work. Yeah, so we had a proposed code change, ran it on our hardware simulator, it worked, uploaded the code patch, and achieved lock on the space station with that. Essentially we narrowed the field of view. Yeah, essentially we narrowed the field of view like putting blinkers on a horse.Well, technically astronauts have been on the spacecraft, at the space station. We've already done a lot of work to pass the space station safety review. As Dragon is approaching the space station, it's a robotic space freighter, basically, and if something were to go wrong it could potentially destroy theuhh.. wrong word, heh.. shudder at the thoughtbut in an absolute worst case  something terrible could happen to the space station and people on-board could be hurt. Obviously there's a lot of caution that's exercised there, both at SpaceX and at NASA, and before we even get close to the space station we've run a million simulations and we're checking it as we get closer, we're verifying that everything looks good, but it is an autonomous vehicle. It's not as though there's someone with a joystick that's steering it. It's just pausing at various points to ask if it has permission to proceed. Then we look at the data, make sure everything is cool, and then give it the okay to go to the next, essentially, way point, but it's doing all of the guidance and control itself.To add, essentially, the ascent and descent elements of manned spaceflight, as we essentially haveit's 'man rated' if you will, for being around the space station, but not for the ascent and descent phases. In the ascent phase we need to add a launch escape system, so if something were to go wrong with the booster we can escape from the booster and then we've also got to do some upgrades to the rocket to make sure it's as fault tolerant as possible and for those parts which are not as easy to make fault tolerant, that we've tested the living daylights out of it and it'll have safety margins that are higher than a rocket that would carry a satellite. Typically, it's a rough rule of thumb, you aim for about a 25% margin on a satellite mission but a 40% margin on a manned missionabove the expected flight loads. Now, our abort system I'm pretty excited about because this is going to be the first time there will be abort capability all the way to orbitor, proper abort capability all the way to orbitbecause the escape engines are built into the sidewall of the Dragon spacecraft and they use the same propellant that would otherwise be used for on-orbit maneuveringbecause you either need to maneuver on-orbit or you need to escapeyou don't need to do both. It's like, one or the other. As a result, we avoid having the big solid rocket on the nose and that has some real advantages. That big solid rocket is so heavy that you can't afford to carry it all the way to orbit, so you usually have to discard it about three minutes into the flight. You don't have high acceleration escape capability all the way to orbit like you will with Dragon. It has enough thrust to accelerate away from the rocket, even in atwhat's called Max-Q, which is maximum dynamic pressure. So, even when it's going about mach 1.8 or so, and the rocket is going at full force below it, it still has enough thrust to actually get away from the rocket.Now, being a liquid rocket, we do have an advantage that we can turn it off. Ya know, and it's pretty easy to turn off. In fact, with liquid rockets the tough part is making it stay on. That's what you need to worry about. But for solid rockets, once they're on they tend to stay on. I'm not a big fan of solid rockets for human transportation. Solid rockets are, themselves, quite reliableparticularly if you don't have segmentsbut you can't turn them off. So, if something goes wrong with the overall system, you're going to have some things wanting to hit you in the butt that are hard to get away from.Version 1 of Dragon is pretty basic really. I'd classify it as, kinda, level one reentry and landing, which is parachutes to a water landing. It's fairly straightforward and fairly reliable but what we're going to for, call it, version 1.5 is we're going to go parachutes to a land landing. I'm hoping we'll be able to do that next year, but certainly the year or there after. Then, level 2, or maybe even level 3maybe level 2 is like wingsbut then level 3 would be landing with thrusters. Another advantage of having the escape thrusters built into the escape wall of the Dragon is that, when you come back, you can use some of them to land. So, they're really high precision and they're redundant thrustersyou have eightand well, if you lost the right four you could lose fouryou could lose at least onethey're in pairs, so. We've gone back and forth on how we can make this better, but there's so many constraints in the system, but this is pretty good. You can lose any one of the engines and still be safe, and then we have parachutes as a backup on top of that, soand the parachutes are redundant. So, there should beI can't think of a safer way to do it, honestly, than to have redundant thrusters and redundant parachutes for landing. In a best case scenario you can be quite reusable because you can land propulsivelyjust like they landed on the Moonand that sets you up for reuse quite well.Oh, I guess a lot of people aren't aware that of the 46 missions that we have under contract, only 12 are for NASA. So, the great majority of our missions are actually commercial missions. They're satellite launch missions, and that's both for our Falcon 9 rocket and our Falcon Heavy rocket and we're hopeful that Dragon can have some commercial use as well. Ya know, we're talking to some people. There's this guy Bigelow who wants to do a private space station and that could be pretty cool 'cause then we could, ya know, maybe deliver people to his space station, share costs with NASA, ya know, reduce the burden of NASA in that regard. I think really the general approach is, what are the things that we can do to forward the cause of space, and that's what we'll do. Now, some of those things are not going to be the most commerciallyya know, they wouldn't necessarily be profit maximizingbut I don't really care and that's why I'm making sure I maintain control of the company. SpaceX is going to be a viable companywe have some venture investors and I don't think they're too worried about thatbut there are different ways to run a company. You can run a company where you're really under the gun with each quarter and you've got to make a lot of short term optimizations which makes it difficult to make big technology advancements because some of those can take years to pay off, so you're they're just at the wrong interval, ya know, the wrong interval to make those changes if you're only doing things on a quarterly basis.The goal at Tesla has been to change people's thinking with respect to electric cars. People were operating under the illusion that an electric car would have to be, let's say, aesthetically challengedya know, low performance, low range, and kinda look like a golf cart. None of these had to be true, but I'd talk to people and say none of these things have to be true, ya know, and you can have a long range car, the physics is pretty obviouswhat's the energy density of lithium-ion and what's the energy usage per mile, it's pretty straight forward, and people would be like, oh, no no no, that can't work. I'd be like, where's the error in the calculations here? These are pretty obvious. Amazingly, people would refuse tothey'd either ignore it or say it can't be doneit's ridiculous. So, we just decided to make a car and that's pretty hard to ignore. Whereas discussions or Powerpoint are much easier to ignore. Everything does work on Powerpoint, so there is reason for skepticism there, but having an actual car and one that is fully homologated for use on the roads and meets all the safety standards and everything, was really important. So we did the Roadster and then after the Roadster people said, oh, sure, you can make a small electric sports car, but you couldn't make a real car. Ya know, like a Mercedes or an Audi that has all of the features and capabilities. So then we made the Model-S. Actually, people were quite skeptical. Then we made the Model-S and people were like, oh, you couldn't possibly ramp up production. Yeah, I could ramp up production. It's sort of like a series of issues.The goal with the Model-S is to show that you can have a long range electric car and with the recent announcement of the supercharger, we're building a nation wide network of really fast chargers, hence the name 'supercharger' which is originally obviously from the gasoline car industry. The idea there is you'll be able to charge your car with the same level of convenience as you'd normally use your gasoline car. If you start a trip that starts at 9am, by noon you want to stop for a bite to eat, go to the restroom and gas up your car, and that's a good 20 to 30 minutes. We were able to figure a way, with some advanced technologies, to have it such that you could stop for half an hour and have three hours driving recharge. So about a six to one ratio. Which is about the convenience inflection point, for most people, for a long range trip.We made that work, and then we added solar panels to the supercharger stations to address the long tailpipe argument that says, oh, you're just pushing emissions to the power plant. Well, no, because the supercharger stations will actually generate more electricity than the cars use in recharging. For the supercharger, it's basically the same level of convenience during long distance trips. We'll have it nation wide. We already have it throughout California, so you can drive anywhere in California using the supercharger. It'll have enough solar panels to generate electricity back to the grid on an annual basis. That's how we're sizing them, so they'll be slightly energy positive. Then we're also making it free. Well, it's not entirely free. There's obviously the cost of it is built into the cost of the Model-S but the cost of it was so low that we looked at it and said, well, we could charge some small amount for this or we could really make it free for the Model-S. Right.. well, it’s a little more than that, but if you were to stop and put in, say, 150 miles range, it’s about four or five bucks. So it’s really not much. People drive long distance a lot less than they think they do. “I wanted to have something that is really profoundly better than a gasoline car for driving long distance.” Not just try to equal a gasoline car but try to say, well, what could we do which makes an electric car suddenly better than a gasoline car and so that’s where free long distance is pretty awesome. You can’t do that with a gasoline car. It’s way too expensive. The basic tag line is: drive anywhere, for free, on free sunlight, forever.“I love being a political football.” I guess, with respect to Tesla, here are things are with Tesla. Tesla has over 35,000 people and these are high quality jobs. We manufacture, from the ground up, in the US. At least in respect to Tesla, we’re a surge in American manufacturing activity. The car’s critically acclaimed. We actually export powertrains to the rest of the world because we have Toyota and Mercedes as customers. We export electric powertrains to those guys. We’re a net exporter and we’ve got balance of payments. We’re expecting to be break even next month, which is pretty fast after the introduction of the Model-S, I think. Yeah, so, and then if you look at our market cap, the value that the stock market assigns to Tesla is about three billion dollars. If you were to take every company that’s failed in every DOE program, it doesn’t add up to $3B. If you were to actually look at this from a venture portfolio standpointpresumably Mitt Romney understands these things, but maybe notthen the net gain is very significant. You can say, well, what value has been added to the American economy, what value has been subtracted from the companies that didn’t work out, and the net is very positive. So one would have to say that the DOE has done a very good job.We did unveil the Model-X, earlier this year, and the Model-X is an SUV that is built on the same platform as the Model-S. It’s got a slightly longer wheel base but otherwise it’s on the same platform. It’s really addressing the SUV and minivan market. It’s got a unique innovation which is the double hinged gull wing door on the side. That’s never been done before I believe. Certainly hasn’t been done in any production car. We call it the Falcon Wing because when both doors are up it looks sort of falcon-like. I think it’s the coolest door. As far as doors go, it’s pretty cool. The reason it has to be double hinge is that, if you just made it a single hinge gull wing, the arc as it swings out, it swings out too far and then too high, but as a double hinge you can actually do the same where it basically does this movement. So it’s actually going, almost straight up and if you can physically fit between the Model-X and another car, then you can open the door. It’s actually more convenient than a minivan door, because a minivan door when that opens it actually comes out and slides, so you can’t get to the car from the rear, but with the Model-X you can, when the door’s open. I think in the very beginning it may be similar to an Antarctic station.  Yeah, absolutely. That’s the thing that we should be aiming for long-term, which is to create a self-sustaining civilization on Mars. I mean, that’s the thing that will ensure that, in the event of a calamity on Earth, civilization continues. The light of consciousness is not extinguished. Those seems like good things to me. So yeah, I think that’s what we should strive for. I don’t think we need to anything at the Antarctic, that’s nice, but on Mars we should be aiming for a real civilization. Which ultimately means taking, at least, tens of thousands of people. Perhaps ultimately millions of people and millions of tons of cargo, because you’ve gotta recreate the industrial base of Earth. So, to do that, you need really big rockets launching a lot, obviously. I don’t think that’s going to bewe shouldn’t make that a requirement on the way to Mars but that’s a potential optimizationto mine near-Earth asteroids for propellantbut the near-Earth asteroids are not very big. I guess the Moon is also a potential place for propellant depots.  Yeah, it’s in like, permanently shadowed craters. It’s pretty chilly in there, but you could mine the Moon, potentially for water and you could have propellant depots on the Moon. I’d liken it to when the early colonies in the Americas were being established, and early voyages of discovery. You kinda want to go there and then, if it turns out that having way stations makes that trip more efficient over time then people will build those stations. As soon as you’ve got that destination, you’ve got the forcing function, then you’ll see people do whatever seems sensible to make that better. You definitely don’t need to have to mine asteroid resources to get people to Mars. You definitely don’t need to do that, so I’d saysince it’s incredibly hard to begin with, unless something needs to happen, I would toss it out, and let people do it if it seems to makes sense later when you’ve got that forcing function of the trips between the planets. I think the things to do is to producethis is what I thinkwe need to build really big rockets and I think they should probably use methane, because that’s the cheapest fuel, and you can refuel methane on Mars by taking CO2 from the atmosphere, mining water ice, there’s a huge amount of water ice on Mars, and you get CH4 and O2 pretty easy, like, basically. That’s the way to go, and just make ‘em real big and launch ‘em a lot and reusablemust be reusable, this is important. I don’t know, lots of exploring? I think you’d probably be working on building infrastructure on Mars and exploring all the interesting things. Like, ya know, Valles Marineris makes the Grand Canyon look tiny, it’s kind of cool, go down that and check it out. Olympus Mons, it’s kind of a shallow gradient but it’s the tallest mountain in the solar system. Exploring a new planet, I think, would be pretty interesting, and then building the infrastructure necessary to make life self-sustaining on Mars. Well, first of all, I think if we had to, we could, just with incremental improvements to lithium-ion, I think we could turn the entire automotive world to pure electric. It gets harder for airplanes. You need a higher energy density for airplanes. But certainly for cars, boats, trains, lithium-ion could do it. There are some modest breakthroughs happening in lithium-ion to, for example, change the inert from carbon to silicon, and there are some lithium-ion chemistrys like lithium-sulfur which actually have really high density. In the 400 to 500 Wh/kg range. Current state of the art of lithium-ion is about 250 Wh/kg. That said, I do think there’s potential for a breakthrough in capacitors. In fact, that’s what I was going to be studying at Stanford, where I dropped out, was working on high energy density capacitors and leveraging the equipment that’s been developed for chip making and photonics to, ya know, create something that’s solid state but precise down, essentially at the molecular level and see if that tens of billions of dollars invested in making really tiny circuits could be used to create an ultra capacitor with high energy density. There are some companieswell, there’s one company I know in particular, based in Silicon Valleyit’s not E-Store, in case you’re wonderingthat I think has the potential for a breakthrough in that arena. That could be quite revolutionary. Right, well. If you’re a newcomer product, it’s really not enough to just be as good as the incumbent product, because people are used to what they’re used topeople are set in their ways. In order to get people to change, you have to do something that’s meaningfully better. Otherwise, the gradient of changeya know, the change with respect to timethat change is going to happen slowly. If you want it to happen fast, it’s got to be obviously better. That’s why we’ve tried so hard with the Model-S to create a car that’s obviously better. Adding things like the superchargerwe could have just said, oh, every time you use a supercharger it’s going to be $5 and then people would have to do some math to figure out, okay, what does that mean relative toand it’s like, it’s free. People understand free. That’s really easy to understand. I think it is important to be highly adaptive, and I do think physics is a good framework for thinking. I think, it’s like, particularly as you’re trying to figure out new things, reasoning from first principles is a good way to go, as opposed to reasoning by analogy. It’s computationally easier to reason by analogy and if you tried to reason from first principles all the time, you wouldn’t be able to get through your day, but when you’re trying to do something new and complicated, that is the way to do it because analogies are not necessarily perfect and they’re relying on things that have already occurred, so, if you’re trying to make something new then it’s not a great way to go. What reasoning from first principles really, just, means is boiling something down to the fundamental truths, or what appear to be the fundamental truths, and reasoning up from there, and then having a good feedback loop. So, you’re seeing what happens and adjusting accordingly and then, I think, it’s important to be particularly alert to negative feedback because people generally, particularly friends, they’ll be reluctant to give you negative feedback, because they don’t want to hurt you. The reason they’re reluctant to do that is because most people are hurt when they get negative feedback. It’s not an unreasonable expectation. So, you have to actually coax people to give you negative feedback. Encourage negative feedback and listen to it carefully, and don’t react in a bad way when you receive it. That’s really important. I think payment systems are pretty easy, particularly if you don’t have to integrate with a lot of legacy stuff then payment systems are super easy. That’s just like World Of Warcraft, ya know, credits. How many credits do you have in your database? You don’t have exchange rates and have to, like, interface with bills and coins and have credit cards and have a federal reserve and all these things, they complicate things. What Paypal really did is de-complicate things, but Paypal would be, like, super-trivial in a new environment. Well, I think that you just need to show that it’s physically possible. Step one would be, like, just envelope it with physics and make sure you haven’t done something that, like, violates the conservation of energy or momentum or something like that, because then you’re almost certainly wrong. Even if someone tells you you’re right. Those things are pretty important. Basically, ensure that success is one of the possible outcomes. That’s key. Often these things can be illustrated with some very straight forward equations. You don’t need to get too complicated. So, if you can sort of walk people through that, that’s helpful, but I don’t know. It’s just amazing. I’ve literally been in situations where I point out the series of obvious thingslike, three child-like equationsliterally 11th grade or something like that, and it obviously comes to this conclusion, and yet people are still not convinced, and I’m like, how can you look at that and not be convinced. Let me tell you one of my pet peeves: space solar power. Okay, the stupidest thing ever. If anyone should like space solar power, it should be me. I got a rocket company and a solar company. I should be really on it, ya know. But it’s like, super obviously, not going to work because, ya know, if you have solar panelsfirst of all, it has to be better than having solar panels on Earth, so then you say, okay, solar panel is on-orbit, you get twice the solar energyassuming that it is out of Earth’s shadowbut you’ve gotta do a double conversion. You’ve gotta convert it from photon to electron to photon, back to electron. You’ve got to make this double conversion, so, okay, what’s your conversion efficiency? Hmm. All in, you’re going to have a real hard time even getting to 50%.  It does not matter, put that cell on Earth then. See, that’s the point I’m making. Take any given solar cell, is it better to have it on Earth, or is it better to have it on orbit? What do you get from being in orbit? You get twice as much sunbest casebut you’ve got to do a conversion. You’ve got to convert it the energy to photonswell, you have incoming photons that go to electrons, but youyou’ve gotta do two conversions that you don’t have to do on Earth, which is you’ve got to turn those electrons into photons and turn those photons back into electrons on the ground, and that double conversion is going to get you back to where you started, basically. So why are you bothering sending them to bloody space. “I wish I could just stab that bloody thing through the heart.” BTWelectron to photon converters are not free and nor is sending stuff to space. Then it obviously super doesn’t work. Case closed. You’d think. You’d think case closed, but no. I guarantee it’s gunna come up another ten times. I mean, for the love of God. I think it’s okay. I mean, I think the whole interplanetary human flight thing being a danger to human beings is somewhat overblown because, clearly, we sent people to the Moon, right, and that’s deep space and they’ve lived to quite an old age. We’ve not seen any premature deaths, really, of people that have gone to the Moon. So really it’s just a question of how long can you be in deep space and there’s a certain damage rate per day which is then offset by your body’s ability to repair that damage. So, going to Mars and doing a six month journey is going toyou’re going to have some slight increased risk of cancer but, from what I’ve seen, sort of a back of the envelope calculation, that increase in cancer is less than if you smoked on the way there. Although smoking is quite bad, I have to say. There is one thing that people should be quite concerned about, which is solar flares. This is often thought about in the wrong way, where people say, oh, you need to have, like, you need to have 20 feet of water or whatever it is to shield against a serious solar storm and they say, oh, you need to have a sphere of water around you, and that sphere of 20 foot water would be ridiculously expensive, or ridiculously heavy, but that’s true, but actually, what you’d really do is you’d have a column of water, pointed at the sun and you’d be in front of the column. That’d make much more sense, and then you’ve gotta have water anyway, so it doesn’t end up being a big deal. So I don’t think the journey there isthere’s no showstoppers there but over time we will find ways to improve it and reduce the risk of cancer and that sort of thing and reduce the journey length as well, but really, fundamentally, we need to get there. If we can’t get there, it’s all like academic, so we need to get there.Well, I feel reasonably good about things, but I don’t want to be complacent. We definitely want to keep the pace of the technology progression as rapid as possible. We want to do lots of launches, which are kind of our bread and butter, and then keep pushing the envelope in parallel on new technology. It’s just a scratch It’s just a flesh wound.  No. We actually file flight plans. When we file a flight plan we file a flight plan with zero, one and two engines out. So it wasn’t even considered, from the Air Force and FAA standpoint, it wasn’t actually considered an anomaly because it was one of the prescribed flight plans. It was considered an anomaly but not a failure, sorry. Well, I think they’re getting smaller and bigger. On the small side you’ve got companies like Surrey, which I used to be an investor in until it was acquired, and I certainly like what they’re doing in small satellites. And then, on the big side, you’ve got the big geosynchronous satellites where, particularly for places that have a limited number of geostationary spots, they actually want the satellite to be as big as possible. So I think you’ve got this bifurcation going on to both big and to small but probably with fewer medium. I think as long as we're making revolutionary improvements in space transport, I think there is room for a lot of companies. But we really need to get to rapid, and completely reusable rockets. Just as is the case with aircraft. I mean, aircraft are rapid and completely reusable. They have a maintenance cycle and everything, but basically you can put fuel in and fly it again. You can land a 747 and takeoff in an hour and a half later, and you should be able to do that with rockets too, and if you can do that, the costs will come down so dramatically that we could find many uses for rockets. That's definitely not one of our main initiatives, and I think there's likely to be some changes in that program, but nothing I could comment on myself. Every now and again I just throw something out, just for fun. I can confirm that the name of the engine is Raptor. I'd like to announce maybe some details about the engine next year. Perhaps, what is even more interesting is the spaceship that that's attached to.  You've gotta.. you show a little leg, but not all of it. The Grasshopper is kind of a test rig and it’s intended to help us develop a vertical landing capability. Obviously, the rocket can certainly takeoff vertically, now we need to make them land. Grasshopper has very robust landing legs. It’s designed to be able to take very off-nominal landings. It’s got a Falcon 9 version 1 stage, combined with the Merlin-1D engine that we’ve got on the next generation Falcon 9. So it’s sort of a hybrid vehicle of past and future technologies. We’ll use it to sort of figure out a bunch of things and then next year we’ll upgrade to the actual flight design of Falcon 9, the next generation of Falcon 9. Our long term goal is to recover the entire rocket, and be able to relaunch the whole thing quickly. Our rockets are standing by. I think there’s potentially some market for mining asteroids as kind of a refueling station on the way to Mars and other places. I’m not convinced there’s a case for taking something, say, platinum, that is found in an asteroid and bringing it back to Earth. Don’t know it well enough. In the past, whenever I’ve done the basic math on an air breathing stage, it doesn’t seem to make sense, but I could be wrong about that and I always look to figure out how I can better understand things. I think it’s maybe easier to just increase the size of the boost stage than to add an air breathing stage. There’s no real work going on now in terms of designing Mars habitats. I think we need to focus our energies on designing the Mars spaceship first, and then that would effectively be the first habitat. I’m hopeful that, from a SpaceX standpoint, we’ll be ready to do such a mission in the 10 to 15 year time frame. So we’ll see if that occurs. It may or may not be a government. There may be some government involvement or none and I don’t know quite yet but I think SpaceX will be ready at approximately the time we intend to be. In 2013, I’m hopeful we’ll be able to demonstrate high altitude supersonic liftoff and return. So, it’s being able to have the stage takeoff, go supersonic, and then come back and land propulsively at the launch site. Then, I hope we will also demonstrate the Falcon Heavy towards the end of next year and it will be the most powerful vehicle in the world by a factor of two. More than a factor of two actually. Yeah, so 2013 should be an exciting year. It’s quite difficult for us to employ people who don’t have a green card because of US ITAR rules. So, my first advice would be, do anything you can to get a green card. We have been successful in a few cases with getting permission from the US state department, defense department, to appoint non-US citizens but it’s very difficult to do that. Unfortunately. I wish it were easy. I’ve always been into science fiction movies and books, and I always thought that we were on our way to becoming a spacefaring civilization, just to be like the stories that I would read about, and then I was disappointed to learn that it didn’t seem to be happening. That’s when I got into.. that’s why I started SpaceX, to make that a reality and not just be forever a fiction. Well, certainly, we’re very determined to succeed and fortunately we had just enough money to make it to the fourth launch which was the one that worked. Thank goodness. “I think we had a critical mass of technical talent and just enough money and a design that was sensible and those were probably the three ingredients that resulted in success eventually.” I split my time approximately evenly between the two companies, although depending upon which company needs me the most I might allocate a bit more time to that company at times. So, right now, I’ve got a majority of my time on Tesla but earlier this year was a majority of my time on SpaceX. “I think NASA is actually doing a pretty good job overall.” I mean, they’ve been very pro-commercial-space and I have really nothing but good things to say about what NASA is doing. You know, it’s funny, it’s kind of a combination of electric and aerospace. I’d like to polish something before the end of the year hopefully, but I want to make sure I vet it with a few people within SpaceX and Tesla and maybe a few outside people and then just sorta put it out there as sort of just something that I think would be sensible and then ask people to add to it and modify it and maybe people haveI’m sure people have good ideas about making it betterand then try to come up with some sort of standard design that anyone can implement in the world. I think that’ll be kind of cool. You know, sort of like an open source operating system, like an open source transport system. It’ll be really neat. But the basic thought behind it is to have something like a cross between a rail gun and a Concorde. I sort of like saying that because some people are going to be scared about that and some people will be like yes, that’s awesome. I’m appealing to the second group.  Nice try. Oh, fictional spacecraft. Well, you know, I’d have to say that would be the one in The Hitchhiker’s Guide To The Galaxy that’s powered by the Improbability Drive. I mean, that thing’s awesome. It does the most unexpected things.Alright, thank you.Thanks for having me, it’s always great coming back here. This is a really awesome place and I always like talking to people from the aerospace industry. I think, when I came here four years ago, I think that was right before we reached orbit. Maybe just several months before we reached orbit. So just to put things in perspective, while recent years have been good, that has not always been the case. The first three flights of Falcon 1, failed. The first flight failed quite soon, the engine shut off about 30 seconds into flight, it continued ballistically for another 30 seconds and then landed like an anti-tank weapon, not far from the launch site. At some point we’ll release the blooper reel, but I think we’ll wait a few years before we do that. But from those first days, when myself and the team were picking up bits of rocket off the reef, things have come a long way. We actually had two more failures after that one, and then the fourth flight, in late 2008, was successful, and that was a close one because I’d run out of money, and there weren’t a lot of people who were keen on funding a rocket company, and I think if we’d said yes, our fourth launch wasn’t successful, but the fifth one’s the charm, that would not have gone down well.Thankfully, the fourth launch did work and that I think gave customers of ours, NASA and others, the confidence to award us additional launch contracts and for additional private investment to come and help fund the company, besides myself. I would like to thank those investors, Draper Fisher Jurvetson, and Founder’s Fund, and  for having faith there at an early stage to invest in a rocket company. Since then, we got that fourth demonstration launch to work, and then we did our first satellite launch, which was a commercial mission for Malaysia and that launch successfully put the satellite into orbit and I think it’s actually still up there, and then we were able to go from there to develop the Falcon 9. In the Falcon 9, we’ve leveraged the engine we developed with the Falcon 1, the Merlin 1-C, and we’ve essentially ganged nine of those together on the first stage, and then one on the upper stage with an expanded nozzle, and that actually gave us about 20 times the payload capability of Falcon 1 because, in the case of Falcon 9, we were using a pump fed upper stage as opposed to a pressure fed upper stage. It’s an important difference, for those of you who are familiar with how rockets are designed.We took most of the lessons learned from Falcon 1 and we were able to apply that to Falcon 9, so that the launches of Falcon 9 were all successfulthey all reached orbit. Sometimes there were a little glitch along the way, but they all reached orbit. There’s an advantage to having the 9 engines, because if one of them doesn’t work and has what we call a RUDwhich is rapid unscheduled disassemblythen it still makes it to orbit. That’s something we think is important for commercial airlinersall commercial airliners have multiple engines so that if you’re going across the Pacific at night and you lose an engine, you don’t have to use the life raft or that jacket that they give you which, I think, has not been used effectively, very often. So multi-engine, I think is good, and we’re going to keep that philosophy going forward, and where we’re going now is to the next generation of Falcon 9, which is a vertical take-off and landing capability. I’ll show you the video, which is the first sorta flight of the Grasshopper project.That craft is actually, quite bigit’s about 10 stories tall and that flight was to about five meters. In coming months we’ll be increasing the envelope, which is just the sort of thing you do with aircraft, where you have envelope expansionyou gradually increase the altitude and speed and as you see things getting a little wobbly, then you take corrective actionideally before there’s a craterand you can iterate to a successful outcome. But do I think there will be a few craters along the way. I think that’s a likely outcome. We’ll be very lucky if there’s no craters along the way in creating a vertical landing rocket. Obviously we already know how to do vertical takeoff, but we’ve got to learn how to do vertical landing. The reason to do the vertical landing is we aspire to achieve a breakthrough which I think is extremely important for rocketry, which is rapid and complete reusability. It’s important that it be both rapid and complete, like an aircraft, or like a car, or a horse, or a bicycle. Even if you have to repaint a plane between flights, you’ll probably more than double the cost of the ticket. You really need to be able to just reload the propellant and fly again. And that’s going to take a bit of effort. It’s not going to happen overnight, but we’ll keep going in that direction until ultimately it’s as close to aircraft-like reusability as one can achieve.If you compare the cost of the rocket, to the cost of the propellant, you can see why. The cost of the propellant is only about 0.3% of the cost of the rocket, and we have a low cost rocket, it’s not like our rocket is expensive. The Falcon 9 is $60 million, and that’s for something which has four times the thrust of a 747 and about the same liftoff mass, so that’s a good deal, but the propellant is only $200,000. So, if we could use the same Falcon 9 rocket a thousand times, then the capital costs would go from being $60 million per flight to $60,000 per flight. Obviously, that’s a humongous difference. Now, there would still be some external costs in terms of service, just like you do on an aircraft, you have inspections and servicing and do all that sort of thing, so there’d be that cost to take into account, but still, it would be dramatically more cost effective to get to orbit, and I think it would open up options that today are hard to appreciatejust as in the early days whenI was just in the camel room, with the Sopwith Camel, I don’t think people could have envisioned that you could take a 747 non-stop from Los Angeles to London. So it’s similar, when we say today that we can see where things will be in the future, but if we enable that capability then that would improve the technology, then all sorts of things happen. We’ve gotta make that happen. We’ve gotta achieve that goal.I think it’s a pivotal step on the way to establishing a self-sustaining civilization on Mars. If we don’t do that I just don’t think we’ll be able to afford it, because it’s a difference between something costing a half a percentage each year of GDP and all the GDP.. obviously it can’t be all of the GDP, we’d get a lot of complaints about that, but half a percent of GDP, or maybe quarter a percent of GDP, okay that’s manageable, and I think most people would agree, even if they don’t intend to go themselves, that if we’re spending something between a quarter to a half a percent of GDP on establishing a self-sustaining civilization on another planet is probably worth doing. It’s sort of a life insurance policy for life, collectively, and that seems like a reasonable insurance premium, and plus it would be a fun adventure to watch even if you don’t participate. Just as, when people went to the Moon, only a few people actually went to the Moon, but in a sense, we all went there vicariously. I think most people would say that was a good thing. When people look back and say what were the good things that occurred in the 20th century, that would have to be right near the top of the list. So I think there’s value, even if someone doesn’t go themselves.So that's why it's really important. Then, if you get to, well, why don't we have fully and rapidly reusable rockets? Why doesn't someone just do it? Well, it's quite tricky, that's the reason. We live on a planet where this is not easy. It's possible, but quite difficult. If we lived on Mars, this would actually be a quite easy thing. But, at 1g, this is just barely possible, I think. The reason it hasn't occurred in the past, is that when people try to design a rocket, and even one that is expendable, after a lot of smart people have worked on the rocket using advanced materials and various techniques, you typically get 2 to 3% of liftoff mass to orbit, and that's expendable. So if you say, okay, well, what if you want to add in the reusable bits? Adding the reusability tends to take another 2 to 3%. So then you end up with zero or negative, and there's not much point sending a rocket to orbit with nothing on it. In the past, things have been cancelled when it looked like success was not one of the possible outcomes. In fact, usually they've been cancelled after it was clear that success was not one of the possible outcomes. So, the trick then, is to make a rocket that is so mass efficient that it gets close to 4% of its payload to orbit in an expendable configuration, and then improve the weight of the reusability bits, push that down to around 2% and you get a net of four minus twoso, on the order of 2% of your payload to orbit in a fully reusable scenario. That requires paying incredibly close attention to every aspect of the rocket's design. The efficiency of the engine, the weight of the engine, the weight of the tanks, the legs, even the secondary structure, the wiring, the plumbing, and the electronics, making sure your guidance system is extremely precise, and just pulling all sorts of tricksevery trick in the bookand then coming up with some new ones. In order to achieve that level of mass efficiency.Now, I think I see a path to making this happen, but those could be famous last words. That's what we're seeing the beginnings of. It'll take a while, I don't know how long it'll take, but I'm hopeful that we can start to bring back the first stage in the next year or two. We've already brought back Dragon, so we know what bringing something back from orbit is like, and we'll start to reduce the mass rquired to bring something back from orbit. We really have to hone it down so that the thermal shielding and the strengthening of the structure is only just what is needed to come back and not any more. And then I think, perhaps full reusability is in the 5 to 6 year time frame, but that could be famous last words. So that's our goal.That's the most important thing, technically, that SpaceX has to achieve, and in parallel we're doing things like the Falcon Heavy, which will have two additional first stages as side boosters and with the upgraded thrust of the Falcon 9 that will take it to nearly 60% to 65% thrust of the Saturn Vjust to put it into perspective. Maybe around 4.5 million pound thrust, which is about twice as powerful as any other rocket on Earth but, I think, if you want to go to Mars you need something substantially bigger than that. So, some future vehicle will likely aim to be quite a bit bigger than that.So that's where SpaceX is and stay tuned for more developments. With that said, I'm happy to answer any questions from the audience. So let's jump in.I should have remembered to play this video. This gives you a sense of what I'm talking about for the reusability. Now, this was done by a modelling team, it wasn't done by the SpaceX engineering team, so it's not entirely specifically accurate, but it gives you a sense for things at least. So, now we've gone through stage separation, the first stage is going to turn around and reigniteit's actually going to reignite three of the engines, notsee, it's doing three thereit sort of magically got rid of the inter-stage which is obviously, not supposed happen, and the real legs are much bigger than that, those are the little guys. But that's approximatelyimagine much bigger legs, and a much taller stage with an inter-stage on top, and that's approximately what will happen. So yeah, that's the vehicle, and then there's the next generation of Dragon, the Dragon version 2, which actually does not look like that, but we'll be unveiling that fairly soon. I think that is pretty cool. Dragon version 1, we didn't really know what we were doing, most likely know more at this point. That's why Dragon version 1 looks fairly similar to things in the past, we thought, well, better not stray too far from things in the past, and hopefully it worked. Yeah, so the next version of Dragon will do that, but it looks a bit different, but it'll have legs that pop out and it has eight thrusters that are arranged in four pairs around the exterior. On the actual vehicle, the pairs are not at quite 90 degrees, partially because we wanted to shift the engines that are on the wind-ward side of the back shell, a little more towards the lee-ward side, so they're not quite 90 degrees apart, they're a little closer together on one side, and they're much bigger than what you see there. The super-Draco engines are designed to accelerate the Dragon spacecraft at over 6 gees. So you can go, basically, depending on what sort of dynamic pressure you're facing, go through the sound barrier in about three seconds. I think at altitude your thrust increases, so you're more like 7 to 8 gees.So, sorry, you're asking about, what have we done in respect to thinking about Mars, sort of, colonial systems? The question is, how did I come up with half a million dollar price tag to move to Mars. Well, umm, I sorta started back from the half a million dollar point. To say, sorta, umm, well, in order for Mars to become a self-sustaining civilization, the ticket price has to be low enough that if someone were to work hard and save up then most people in advanced countries in, say, their mid-40s or something like that, could put together enough money to make the trip. I thought, a half a million dollars, well, that's a middle class house in California, basically. Sometimes it's hard to get one for half a million dollars. So, something on that order, that's roughly the right order of magnitude, and then, working backwards, well, you definitely need to have full reusability because even partial expendability would kill that price, and then you need to use a source propellant, a source fuel I should say, because liquid oxygen is incredibly cheap, it's like 2 to 3 cents per pound, so really it comes down to the fuel and pressure, and well, the cheapest fuel is methane.So it's gotta be methane, and the nice thing about methane is you can create it on Mars, because Mars has a CO2 atmosphere and there's a lot of water ice as welland conceivably, you might be able to extract water from the atmosphere, but that may be harder than simply mining water. With water you've got H2O, plus CO2, that gives you CH4 O2, and bingo, you can replenish propellant. Now, you can do this either with hydrogen, or with methane. For a while, we were sort of going down the hydrogen path, and I was looking at the numbers and you get to roughly equivalent delta-v with methane or hydrogen, because of the better mass fraction of the methane system, and then you combine that with the fact that methane is much easier deal with, it's not a hyper-cryogen, and it doesn't have the wiggly hydrogen molecule that likes to get into all sorts of unpleasant places which causes metal embrittlement, and create invisible high temperature fires and that sort of thing. So methane is just sort of a much easier thing to deal with and soperformance about the same, easier to deal with, obvious move in that respect. And actually, with a properly designed methane engine, a staged combustion engine with decent combustion efficiency in the 99% range and reasonable area ratio, 380 isp is quite achievable. The Russians, in ground tests, have achieved 380 isp. So this is clearly an achievable number. So that's sort of the production we're thinking of going, for that.So yeah, you want something that is pretty big. You know, because if they're going to have to spend a lot of months in it, it can't be the size of a minivan. A round trip to Mars, with 6 months there, 18 months on the surface and 6 months back, two and a half years, you want a little room. I shudder to think of doing that in Dragon. You'll come back batty, if you come back. I think Dragon could be quite useful as a generalized science delivery platform for anywhere in the solar system, because, with propulsive landing you couldthat's a generalized solution. You could land on any solid or liquid surface in the solar system, and I think, really, enable a lot more science missions for a low budget, if getting there is taken care of. So that's why I do think Dragon is going to be useful in that respect, apart from being able to carry cargo and people to Earth orbit missions and maybe some other missions too.'Big Dumb Booster' usually refers to a pressure-fed stage. It usually means, minus the turbopump. I think that is actually not a good way to go. You want the turbopump, otherwise your rocket is just too heavy, because if you go with a pressure fed stage, your entire stage has to operate something like the chamber pressure, and you'll have a ton of pressure left there at the end of the flight. So it's just not a great way to go. Turbopumps are hard, but they're not that hard. They're just a spinning centripetal pump, that's tricky, but they're not that tricky. The hard thing about a rocket engine is just getting those last incremental seconds of ISP. That's where it's really quite difficult, and those last seconds of ISP matter a lot for something that's going to go beyond Earth orbit, where just every little tiny bit of ISP is important. So I really do think you just have to push everything to the limit in terms of advanced materials, smart design of everything, high efficiency engines, everything, it's all got to be pushed to the limit. What you don't want to do though is have insufficient margin in your engines and structure such that you have to rebuild them after returning them. That's, I think, an error that was made with the Shuttle. The SSMEs were just really difficult to reuse. They required a lot of inspection and parts replacement between flights. So I think we may need to back off a little bit on our chamber pressure, still aim for a high combustion efficiency but back off a little bit on chamber pressure.Where SpaceX, I think, does quite well is in the mass ratio of the stages. We have a very good stage mass ratio that's, with the current version of Falcon 9, the first stage is around the 94% propellant by mass, and with the new design of Falcon 9 we're closer to 96%, maybe 95.5%, and with a slight improvement in ISP. The Merlin architecture is an open cycle architecture, so it doesn't have the ISP advantage of a staged combustion system, and it's using RP-1 so we're talking ISP for the first stage booster engine around 310 to 312 and, for the vacuum version, that's around 340 to 345. The penalty for an open cycle engine is much less in a vacuum than it is at sea level. So that's where we are. So, we definitely need a new engine for any kind of, sending people to Mars kind of stuff, but I think we can still get to full reusability with the current engines despite having a bit of an ISP disadvantage relative to say, the Russian kerosene based engines.I should have, to be clear, when going through escape, the super-Draco engines on Dragon will generate a minimum of six gees and depending on the scenario that could go up to eight gees. It kinda depends on how much weight you have loaded on and whether you're at altitude or not. The rocket, actually limits the thrust to five gees on ascent. The rocket will actually throttle or shut down engines in a normal scenario to limit the acceleration to five gees. That's set really by the comfort level of the satellites. Five gees is like a nice amusement park ride.We don't like to talk about our customer's payloadsthat's up to them. We respect the privacy of our customers. Direct your question to Bob Bigelow. One thing I should point out though is I think we've got about 46 or so launches on our manifest and, not all of them are actually on the websitealmost all of them are, not all12 of those are for NASA but the remainder are commercial. Sometimes people are under the impression that NASA is the vast majority of our business, but actually they're the biggest single customer but they're only about a quarter of our orders.I don't think anything that's happen will affect the order of flights that will happen next year. I think we'll probably do four flights, that's my best guess, five if we're lucky. One of those flights will be the last of the Falcon 9 version one and we expect to do at least three flights of the upgraded Falcon 9, and we might do a fifth flight, we'll see. We'll certainly have the rockets produced, I feel very confident with that now the rocket production rate is ramping. So we'll have the rockets on the ground, it's just a question of whether the satellites are ready or if there are any other constraints or unexpected things that we encounter, but we'll have the rockets manufactured.That's a tough one. Once we have better reusability, I think improvements to reusability are going to be pretty important. That's really a fundamental one. I can't think of anything that's on-par with that, short of maybe warp drive. Well, ya know, just focus on SpaceX and Tesla for a while. In fact, I would like to just slightly decrease the amount of time that I work. I think I'll be able to do that when Tesla is cash flow positive which hopefully is quite soon. I definitely do not want to run a third company. I have some ideas.. the Hyperloop, which I think could be cooler than just having another bullet train. Hopefully I'll be able to publish something for that sometime this year. I want to vet it with the teams at SpaceX and Tesla and a few other people, put it out there, and then ask people to contribute ideas and see if there's a better way to deal withto make it even betterkinda like a wiki version of it or something, and then there can be some collaborative standard design that people think is a good way to go, and then anyone who wants to build it can just build it. I think that'd be great. I think there's a possibility to have a vertical takeoff and landing electric jet, and I think that's where things will eventually end up, it just may take a while to get there.I'm hopeful that the first human mission to Mars is actually some collaboration of private industry and government, but I think we need to be prepared for the possibility that it has to be just commercial. That may take longer, because it'll require marshaling more resourceswell, you have to get the money together to do it. I want to prepare for a scenario where either path is possible. Basically, it needs to happen one way or another. That's the important thing. I'm not dogmatic as to how it occurs, just that it occurs. I think we'll probably be competitive. Collaboration is difficult because, in a large part, I don't think they want to collaborate and sometimes competition is good. My guess is probably not collaboration but hopefully friendly competition. I think it won't be too bad. We know that people can survive in deep space because the astronauts that went to the Moon lived long lives and were none the worse. We also know that people can live in zero-g for long period of timeI think the record is almost two years or something like that. There were plenty of cases where it was 6 months to a year, which is the journey time to Mars. You'll need to exercise along the way, to make you don't have muscle or bone atrophy but I think it will be okay. In terms of shielding against solar radiation, solar storms, sometimes that problem is stated as you need several meters of water to shield yourself and then somebody does the calculation for the volume of a sphere and that ends up being some enormous quantity of water, but you don't need that, you can just have a column of water pointed at the sun and make sure that you're mostly in front of that column and you should be okay. So I don't think it's a huge show stopperit's certainly not a show stopper and we'll figure out ways to make it better and better over time.  We're just focused on the things that I was just talking about, but there will be at some point. This is using an air breathing engine? When I looked at the numbers it didn't seem too compelling compared to having a slight increase in the size of the first stage. So if you're going to add a whole bunch of complexity, it needs to really pay off and, at least using the numbers I've seen, I have a hard time seeing how it does pay offbut I could be wrong about that. If there is really a big advantage then it would be worth investigating, but it would have to be a big advantage. I would be reluctant to add essentially some sort of jet engine on top of the rocket engine problem. That's a tricky one. Well, I think it's important to keep in mind that the payload to orbit advantage from an air launch is negligible. I think this audience understands that, but most people don't, because it seems like, well, you're high up there and so surely that's good and you're going at, say, 0.7 or 0.8 Mach and you've got some speed and altitude, you can use a higher expansion ratio on the nozzle, doesn't all that add up to a meaningful improvement in payload to orbit? The answer is no, it does not, unfortunately. It's quite a small improvement. It's maybe a 5% improvement in payload to orbit, something like that, and then you've got this humungous plane to deal with. Which is just like have a stage. From SpaceX's standpoint, would it make more sense to have a gigantic plane or to increase the size of the first stage by five percent? Uhh, I'll take option two. And then, once you get beyond a certain scale, you just can't make the plane big enough. When you drop the vehicle, the rocket, you have the slight problem that you're not going the right direction. If you look at what Orbital Sciences did with Pegasus, they have a delta wing to do the turn maneuver but then you've got this big wing that's added a bunch of mass and you've able to mostly, but not entirely, convert your horizontal velocity into vertical velocity, or mostly vertical velocity, and the net is really not great. So, Orbital, for example, is an interesting example. They started off with the Pegasus as an air launch vehicle and then ultimately did not do any air launch vehicles. There is definitely some amount of money that has to be spent establishing a base on Mars. Basically, getting the fundamentals in place. Call it the activation costs of a Mars base. That was true also of the English colonies. They really took a significant expense to get things started. You really didn't want to be part of Jamestown, it was not good. It took quite a bit of effort to get the basics established before the subsequent economics made sense. So there is that investment and we'll need to gather the money to do that, but then once there are regular flights, that's right when you need to get the cost down into the half a million dollar range for somebody to move to Mars, because then I think there would be enough people that would buy thatthey'd just sell their stuff on Earth and move to Marsto have it be a reasonable business case. It doesn't need to be many people, there's 7 billion people on Earth, probably reach about 8 billion by the end of the century, and the world on the whole is getting richer, so I think if only even 1 in 10,000 people decide that they want to go that'll be enough, even 1 in 100,000. In the beginning you'd go with a smaller number of people and you'd have a higher proportion of cargo and emergency equipment and that kind of thing. Once you really got rolling, you'd increase the number of people on the flight because you'd have supplies there. So you wouldn't need to worry about carrying with you all the supplies for the journey there, the stay on the surface and coming back. So initially you start off with maybe a handful of people, less than 10, just trying to give orders of magnitude here, but then you'd go to 100 or more in steady state, down the road. MCT is not an engine. We're only doing one engine, one major engine, and that's the Raptor engine, which is the methane engine. We're going to talk more about the details of that next year, but we're not doing another engine.  No. We might hire a few Russians but.. yeah. I would like to go to Mars, yeah. I want to make sure that things are going well on Earth. Basically, if I die, I want to make sure that things going the way they should. As long as I felt confident of that, then.. yeah. My answer in respect to Ariane is that, I think, any variant of the Ariane 5 is not going to be competitive with Falcon. So the right move, I think, would be to rethink the architecture of Ariane 6 orif they want to call it Ariane 6 or something elsebut think very carefully about that architecture and make sure it has a chance of beating Falcon otherwise it's kind of a pointless exercise. I’m not so much about the space elevator. It has sort of a childhood feeling. “I always kind of think of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory when someone mentions the space elevator.” The problem with the space elevator is that first we’d need a lot of launches just to get the carbon nanotube rope up there in the first place and then this thing would be anywhere from 40,000 to 60,000 miles longumm, that’s longand nobody’s yet built a little ya know, foot stool, out of carbon nanotubes, as far as I’m awareso having something that’s 40,000 miles long is a big leap, and there’s other issues. It ends up being this big sweeper going through Earth orbit and any orbital debris is going to be really good at catching and it’s going to be very high impact. And once you get to the end of the elevator, you’ve gotta do something otherwise you’ll be flung out into space, so you still need rockets. So really all the space elevator would be is a means of reducing the cost of transporting propellant to orbit. In that way, it might work as a long term optimization, not anything worth working on right now. In terms of crew, we expect to be ready to fly our first crew mission in about three years. “Technically, if somebody were to stow aboard the cargo version of Dragon, they’d actually be fine. I mean, hopefully.” If it came back, they’d be fine. In the pressurized volume we actually maintain sea level pressure, we maintain humidity, we maintain the temperature very precisely because we’re trying to transport experiments that have plants and mice and fish and that kind of thing, to orbit and back. So, you could certainly stow away, and do it, but in order for it to be really safe enough we want to establish a standard of safety beyond the space shuttle and anything else prior. You really want to have a launch escape capability, and you want to have lots of flights under the belt, and tested without anyone on-board before putting people on-board. The long lead for Dragon version two is the testing of the launch escape system, and that’s what drives the three year time frame. Well, I really liked sci-fi when I was a kid, and, I’m not sure, I mean, there’s many forms of inspiration, I really like Asimov books and Heinlein books, and Arthur C. Clark, and all the other stuff, Star Trek, Star Wars, Battlestar Galactica. From an inspiration standpoint… having read all those books and seen all the movies, and many other books and movies, just the idea of having a future where that didn’t come true, just seemed terrible. So that’s my inspiration. “We’re happy to take people the Moon. If somebody wants to go to the Moon, we can definitely do it.” But as far as making life multi-planetary, you know, tautologically one must have a second planet and the Moon, it’s a small rock orbiting the Earth with no atmosphere, 28 day period, very little water, lacking in a lot of the key elements one needs for creating a civilization. It’s analogous, I think, to the arctic. The arctic is close to Britain but, it kinda sucks over there, and so, that’s why America is not there, and it’s where it is. Even though it’s a lot harder to cross the Atlantic than it isI mean, from Norway you can practically row to the arctic, in fact I think they did. So, it’s really because it’s the place where one can establish a self-sustaining civilization and really grow to something significantreally bigand in a worst case scenario, if something were to happen to Earth, you have redundancy. Whereas, that would be much harder to do on the Moon and plus, if something calamitous has just happened on Earth, it is very close, so it might affect the Moon too. The problem with space colonies is not that it can’t be done, is just that’s doing it the hard way. In order to create a substantial space colony you have to transfer mass from a planet or from some asteroid, or something. You have to move mass from one place to another. So why move mass from one place to another instead of just going to where that mass is in the first place? Any sort of orbiting space colony is always, in order to expand, is always going to have to pull mass from somewhere, and why bother doing that? It just seems like a much harder thing to do than just going…  it’d actually be harder to travel to the asteroid belt than it would be to travel to Mars. So, if you’re talking about people coming from Earth, it’s going to be easier to go to Mars. Having the atmosphere, you can use atmospheric breaking as well, and you just have an enormous number of resources on Mars. Mars is like, it’s not perfect, but it’s pretty good. It’s got a 24.5 hour rotational period. It’s got a CO2 atmosphere, which means if you just had a transparent dome and pump, you could actually grow Earth plants in martian soil. In fact, it’s recently turned out that martian soil is non-toxic so you could actually grow Earth plants in martian soil just by heating it up and pressurizing it with CO2you need a little fertilizer, but Mars actually has 2.7% nitrogen in the atmosphere which means that you can synthesize fertilizer as well. So yeah, it’s a pretty good option. In fact, it’s the only option, I think. I’m sure it’ll make it more awesome to be a human. I think it’ll be really great. I think that would make for a very exciting future. We start off by establishing on Mars and eventually spread out to the rest of the solar system and start sending ships to other star systems. Once we’ve got a large base on Mars, and a lot of travel between the planets, that’s a great forcing function for the improvement of space transport technology. I think we’ll see rapid improvement and all sorts of inventions that we just can’t envision today. At least in the short to medium term, we’d operate them, but I’m not opposed to selling them and having others operate them. It does require some additional effort to be able to hand off something so that somebody else can use it. I think long term it probably will be an airline type model. Short to medium term it’ll probably remain something similar to how it operates today.  Forecasts are always tricky. If you asked somebody at the dawn of air flight, what are your market forecasts? I mean, they’re going to be wildly wrong. Probably on the low side. Even probably the most optimistic people at the beginning of aviation would seem like pessimists today. Hey, I think liquid fueled rockets are interesting. Throw me a bone. I think, for interplanetary transport, having high efficiency high thrust ion drives could be helpful. I think that’s something you’d want to do anyway, because if you have a big spacecraft with a lot of excess power generation, you might as well strap an ion drive to that. So then there’s a question of how efficient can you convert power to thrust, so that’s one thing. Then potentially something like an electric-magnetic sail would be cool. Yeah I think that would be kinda neat. On the nuclear side, I think that’s tough. It’s really tough taking up a lot of nuclear fuel in a rocket. People have a hard time with establishing nuclear power stations, how would you like one that’s flying over your head and might crash? I mean, we all might think that’s a good idea, but we’re in the minority. No. I didn’t know that. I think vertical integration is sensible. You just need to look at it and say, okay, if we made it ourselves, how much would it cost and if someone else made it, how much would it cost, and then go with the one that is more efficient. I mean, that’s really how we operate. That’s resulted in, I don’t know, 70 % depending on how you count it, by mass or by quantity, 70 % of the rocket is built from raw material at SpaceX. Actually, we’d like to do less. It’s not as though we want to do it all. If we could find more efficient suppliers we would be able to offload some of that stuff.So the plan going forward is obviously to launch a bunch of Falcon 1s. Make anyI’m hoping make any remaining mistakes that remain on the Falcon 1, so we that we make either no mistakes on Falcon 9. The first Falcon 9 launch is intended to be sometime next year, I’d say probably sometime in the second quarter-ish. We do expect to have Falcon 9 at Vandenberg by the end of year, and we’re working to finish all the qualification tests. We’ll probably finish the first stage but not necessarily the rest of the vehicle. We will have a fully assembled vehicle at the Cape  by the end of the year.And then Falcon 9 Heavy would be in a couple years. So if we launch Falcon 9 next year, about two years after that we launch Falcon Heavy with a kerosene upper stage, and probably I’m guessing 2-3 years after, so 5, 5ish years from now is is when we hope to have the cryogenic upper stage the hydrogen upper stage, although that’s… there’s a lot of risks associated with that development. It’s a very difficult stage to do, and we want to ensure that, at least foundationally, it’s capable of very reliable restart. Anyway we’ve got our Dragon spacecraft in development, which is what will replace the Space Shuttle after that retires in 2010, initially for cargo transport to the station and cargo return to Earth, although we’ve been cited to require minimal changes, in fact almost no changes, to carry crew. There is some additional hardware that needs to be built, in particular an escape tower, mostly seats but that’s relatively easy, and some enhancements to the life support system. We already have most of the large support systems for the cargo version of Dragon which we require to carry biological cargo to the station and back: mice and plants and things like that. And some of the hardware is quite sensitive so we have to maintain temperature and O2 within a narrow range, humidity, that kind of thing.So yep, that’s how things are sort of progressing, , but we’re certainly making progress, we’ll keep going until we ultimately have the capability to go to Mars, and not just get to Mars, but do so in a manner which is substantially better economics than are predicted today. And I think we ultimately need to get to a cost-per-person of around maybe a million dollars or two million dollars for a one-way ticket. laugh The return ticket’s much more expensive laugh It is much eas- yeah. It’s, I dunno, I guess probably five times easier or thereab- four times easier to just get a one-way thing than to do a return. And if people are going to go there to settle, then hey, you don’t need a return ticket. When people came over here from England in the beginning I don’t think they bought return tickets.But anyway, I think if we can get it down to a few million dollars, if we can get to some sort of point where the cost of a ticket to Mars is less than, say, the average house price in California, then I think there’s some number of people who would be willing to sell their house and all their stuff and go to Mars. At least enough to get things started.Thank you very much for the kind introduction. It's an honor to be here. This is an incredibly beautiful theater. It's amazing to be in a place design by Christopher Wren. Speaking of Brunel, I'm a big fan of Brunel, I have five boys and I really wanted to name one of them Brunel.. or Isambard. No luck. Hopefully, one in the future.I guess I'll just tell you the story of how I came to be here. The various things that I did and maybe why I did them. Hopefully, that's a bit helpful, and then we're going to have quite a long question and answer session, so feel free to ask me any question no matter how provocative or challenging to what we're doing. I'm actually always interested in negative feedback.I did start out in South Africa, went to Victoria Boys' High, and then left, actually by myself, to go to Canada and then the US to college. Graduating from undergrad I had to make a decision. One path would have led to Wall Street and I guess quite a big salary, and the other was to do grad studies and try to figure out a technical problem and I didn't much like the first one. So, I decided to go out to Silicon Valley and go to Stanford and try to work on ultra-capacitors for use in electric vehicles, and I do actually think there's potential for a significant breakthrough in that area and actually have an energy storage mechanism that's better than batteries. It's not necessary for transport to go electric but I think it is something that would accelerate that. So, I was about to get into grad studies and then it was clear the Internet was going to be something that would be very important to the future, so I thought, well, I can either spend five years in a graduate program and discover that the answer is that there is no way to make a capacitor work, and perhaps get some nice papers published and that kind of thing, but that would be a most unfortunate situation, I thought. You know, one of the possible things to do is determine that success is not one of the possible outcomes, and I could not actually bracket the uncertainty on that.So, I thought, I can either do that, or I can work on building elements of the Internet thatand this was in 1995, so nobody had actually made any money on the Internet but I thought the Internet would be something that would fundamentally change the nature of humanity. It was like humanity gaining a nervous system. All of a sudden, any part of humanity would have access to the collective knowledge, and that's true. It's really quite a remarkable transformation. In the past, if you wanted access to a lot of information, you had to be close to a big library or somethinglike the great Bodleian library nearbybut that would be the only way to gain access to information. Now with the Internet, with everything online, you can be somewhere in the jungles of South America and if you've got access to an Internet connection, you've got access to essentially all the world's information, with a tremendous amount of analytical power behind that. I think it has literally gone from a situation where people would communicate almost like via osmosisif you can imagine a simple multi-cellular creature that would communicate via quite slow chemical signalsand now any part of humanity knows what every other part of humanity is immediately, it's pretty incredible.So anyway, I wanted to be a part of building that, so I decided to start a couple of Internet companies. That actually worked out reasonable well. The first one helped bring the media companies online and then, we solved that, we started another company that you may have used, called Paypal and that we sold for a large amount of money to eBay and that left me in the fortunate position of having the capital to pursue the two other things that I thought would most affect the future of humanity. Being, sustainable energyboth the consumption and production of energy in a sustainable mannerwhich I think is arguably the most pressing problem of the 21st century, and then the other one, which is the extension of life beyond Earth.The one I did first was the space company and the genesis of that is kind of interesting as, at first, I didn't think it would be possible to create a rocket company. I thought what would really make a difference is to have a mission to Mars, a small payload to the surface of Mars, that would get the public excitedto reignite the passion for space exploration such that we could go beyond what we did with the Apollo program. I thought it was quite sad that the Apollo program represented the high water mark of space exploration. It was not something I was able to witness in real time, because I was -2 when they landed. It just seemed as though, if I thought about the future, one where we were a true spacefaring civilization out there exploring the stars and making the things real that we read in science fiction books movies, that seems like a really exciting future. That made me feel good about the future, and one where we're forever confined to Earth made me feel a bit sad. What I was trying to figure out is, how do we reverse that? Like I said, at first it didn't seem like it would be possible to start a space company because it seemed like the province of governments.So my first thought was, if we could do a philanthropic mission to Mars and get the public excited about the idea of going there and then that would lead to an increased budget for NASA and then we could go there. That might, hopefully, work. I figured out how to compress the cost of the spacecraft and the communications systems and the payload and so forth. It would have been a small greenhouse, about a meter across, with seeds in dehydrated nutrient gel, that would land, and you'd hydrate the gel upon landing and you'd have this great shot of green plants against a red background. In the US, that's called the money shot. The public tends to respond to precedents and superlatives. This would be the first life on another planet. The furthest that life has ever traveled and I thought, okay, that would get people pretty excited and maybe they could envision people being there. We would certainly be able to figure out a lot of engineering insights into what it took to maintain planet life on the surface of Mars.So, I got through most of that, but the thing that I got hung up on was the rocket. Getting there in the first place. The US options from Boeing and Lockheed were simply too expensive. I couldn't afford them. So, I went to Russia three times to negotiate purchasing an ICBM. Of course. Desperate times call for desperate measures. I did three visits there and at the end of it, I was able to negotiate a price actually, to buy three of themthree of the largest ICBMs in the Russian fleetbut they were still pretty expensive and by the third trip I actually came to the conclusion that I was operating under the wrong premise. That I was actually mistaken about the willingness to send people to Mars to expand the space frontier. In retrospect, it was quite silly of me to think that people were not interested in such a thing or had lost the will to do this. In fact, people had thought that it was not possible for an amount of money that would materially effect their standard of living. So I came to the conclusion that even if we succeeded in doing this mission, that wouldn't be enough. That would perhaps add a little bit more to the will to do it, but it wouldn't make it clear to people that there was a way. This is the case of almost the opposite, if you can show people that there is a way, then there is plenty of will.So, after that third trip, I had learnt a lot more about rockets at that point, and I held a series of meetingsjust sort of brainstorming sessionswith people from the space industry, to try to understand if I was missing something fundamental about the ability to improve rocketry. This is where I think it is helpful to use the analytical approach in physics, which is to try boil things down to first principles and reason from there, instead of trying to reason by analogy. The way this applied to rocketry was to say, okay, well, what are the materials that go into a rocket, how much does each material constituent weigh, what's the cost of that raw material, and that's going to set some floor as to the cost of the rocket. That actually turns out to be a relatively small number. Certainly well under 5% of the cost of a rocket and, in some cases, closer to 1% or 2%. You can call it, maybe, the magic wand number. If you had piles of the raw materials on the floor and you just waved a magic wand and rearranged them, then that would be the best case scenario for a rocket. So, I was able to say, okay, there's obviously a great deal of room for improvement. Even if you consider rockets to be expendable. That's what I mean about thinking about things from a first principles standpoint. If, on the other hand, I just analyzed it by analogy and said, okay, what are all other rocket companieswhat do their rockets cost, what historically have other rockets cost, and that would be sort of an analogy thing, but it really doesn't illustrate what the true potential is. I think a first principles approach is a good way to understand what new things are possible. This is a good framework. It doesn't mean you'll be successful, but it means that you can at least determine if success is one of the possibilities. That is important, I think.So, I started SpaceX and initially decided to make a small rocket called the Falcon 1 that was capable of putting about a half a ton into orbit. This did not go smoothly. It was quite difficult to attract the key technical talent and, of course, I was quite ignorant of many things. I made lots of mistakes along the way. The first three flights of the Falcon 1 failed, or rather, they certainly didn't get to orbit. The second and third flights arguably got to space but they did not reach full orbital velocity. Fortunately, the fourth flight worked. If it hadn't, SpaceX wouldn't be around, because I'd basically run out of money. So that was a bit of a nail biter. Thank goodness. In fact, this all happened in 2008, so there was really no ability to raise outside money in a meaningful way in 2008 because of the financial crisis. You can imagine trying to go to raise money and saying, well yes, we've just had four failures and the world is in financial ruin, but would you like to give us some money? It would be a definite no. So, fortunately, that succeeded and we were able to go from the Falcon 1 to begin designing the Falcon 9 which is an order of magnitude larger vehicle and, in fact, has over 20 times the payload. It's got a payload to orbit of over ten tons. That actually has gone a lot better because we had the experience of Falcon 1 to go by. The reason we started with Falcon 1 was that I thought we would make a lot of mistakes and if we're going to make a lot of mistakes then it's best to make those mistakes at a smaller scale rather than at a large scale. That seems to have worked, because going to Falcon 9 we've had four flights of Falcon 9 and all four of them have been successful. So I think that principle seems to have worked reasonably well. Touch wood, five flights coming up soon.And then we also developed the Dragon spacecraft because, somewhat optimistically, NASA announced they were going to retire the space shuttle and they didn't have the budget to develop a cargo transport capability to the space station via the normal large government way, and so they put it out to bid to commercial industry, for the first time in NASA history. It's a big step. We were lucky enough to win one of those contracts and then the other company wasn't able to execute, so they got cut, and so we ended up being the primary means of transporting cargo to and from the space station. We just did the first two space station resupply missions this year, and thankfully both of those worked. Going from there, NASA then said, well, what about astronaut transport? So they put out a big competition and awarded two contracts for astronaut transport, one of which went to Boeingthey got a slightly larger contractand one to us. Hopefully, in about three years, we'll have Dragon version 2 and the next generation of Falcon 9 rocket, transporting astronauts to and from the space station.Then we've got Falcon Heavy which is about three times the capability of the Falcon 9 and that will hopefully launch in a year or two. That will actually be the most powerful rocket in the world by a factor of two. So we're making, sort of, steady progress. The Falcon Heavy, to put that into perspective, has about 60% of the capability of the Saturn V moon rocket. So, if you were to combine two flights of Falcon Heavy, with orbital rendezvous and docking, you could actually send people back to the surface of the Moon. Now we're really talking about advancing the frontier, which I think is quite important.The really major breakthrough that's needed in rocketry, the pivotal one which we're aspiring to make, is to have a fully and rapidly reusable rocket. This has not been achieved before. The space shuttle was an attempt to achieve that, but it was not a successful attempt, unfortunately. The main tank of the space shuttle was through away every time, which was also the primary ascent aeroframe. Even the parts that were reusable were so difficult to reuse, for the space shuttle, that it ended up costing four times more than an expendable rocket of equivalent payload capability. It was the right goal, but didn't hit the target. I think this is actually incredibly important. I think it may not be completely intuitive, but I think if one refers to other modes of transport, it makes more sense. All other modes of transport are fully and rapidly reusable. That applies to a bicycle, a horse, a plane, ships. In fact, in normal life, it would be quite silly to discard your horse after every ride, you know, or dump the plane after you flew it. The cost of a 747 is about $300 million, and you'd need two of those to do a round trip from Los Angeles to London, but I don't think anyone has paid half a billion dollars to do that. Nor would one want to. There'd be a lot of travel by boat and train and that sort of thing, if that was the true cost.So it's extremely important in rocketry to achieve full and rapid reusability. This is not an easy thing to do because of Earth's gravity well and just the basic physics of things. There have been many attempts to create a reusable rocket, but they've all sort of been cancelled along the way once people realized they would not succeed. In fact, usually they got cancelled quite some time after it became obvious that they would not succeed. But, the essence of the problem is, if you design an expendable rocket and do quite a good job of it, you'll get about 2% to 3% of your liftoff mass to orbit. Then if you say, well, how much mass is needed to return that rocket and be able to fly it again quickly? Well, about 2% to 3%. So you basically get nothing to orbit. That's how it's been in the past. In order to do something useful, what you have to figure out is, how do you get a much larger percentage to orbit? Let's say, ideally, on the order of 4% of your liftoff mass to orbit, in an expendable configuration, and then compress the reusable elements down to about 2%, so you have a net payload to orbit of 2%, and then you could really have something that's quite useful.The cost of the propellant is only about, let's say, 0.3% of the cost of the vehicle. Take Falcon 9 for example, which uses quite expensive fuel, relatively speaking. I think there are lower cost options. The cost of reloading propellant on Falcon 9 is about $200,000 and the cost of the rocket is $60 million. It's just like a plane. If you were to refuel a plane, not very expensive. If you want to buy a new plane, very expensive.At this point, I am reasonably confident that it can be done and now it's a question of executing to make that design work and seeing if there are any gotchas, and there will probably be a few craters along the way. I'm not expecting this to be a smooth journey. So long as the rocket doesn't land on anyone, we'll be fine. So that's really what SpaceX is focused on right now. Scaling up the size of the rockets and trying to achieve this full and rapid reusability. If you're curious, we're fairly public about things, you can just follow it on the SpaceX website. That's what we're doing on the SpaceX side.Then, in parallel, we've got Tesla, which is developing electric vehicles. That's a whole separate story line. Tell me if I'm going on too long and stop me at any point. Feel free to leave if I'm getting boring. I won't be offended. With Tesla, the goal is to try to create electric vehicles that are more compelling than gasoline vehicles as a product. The fundamental issue we have in energy and transport is the tragedy of the commons. We've got this CO2 capacity of the oceans and the atmosphere that is unpriced, or mostly unpriced. It's almost like we're dumping garbage in the atmosphere and nobody's paying for garbage collection. It's a most unfortunate situation. There are quite significant invested interests in oil and gas and coal, with enormous amounts of money. It's quite a difficult battle to fight. You can't expect them to simply roll over and commit suicide or something. They will fight hard and they have been. So, unfortunately, it requires fighting hard back and creating products, in the absence of there being a tax on CO2, that don't rely on the economics of using hydrocarbon fuels, verses electric cars. That was our goal, in terms of from the beginning, and I'm really excited to see that we've started to achieve that goal with the Model-S. As was mentioned, the Model-S was recently awarded top honors bywas awarded car of the year and automobile of the yearand that was against a very difficult field of gasoline cars. I'm hopeful that this will be seen as a pivotal moment in transport where people finally appreciate that an electric car could be better than a gasoline car.Going into the future, our goal with Tesla is to keep refining the technology, increasing the scale of production, and make a mass market electric car that almost anyone can afford. That's step three on the strategy. Step one was high price, low volume. Step two was mid price, mid volume. Step three is low price, high volume. We're now at step two and we want to progress to step three as soon as possible. We do get quite a bit of criticism at Tesla for creating the Roadster, which we did in collaboration with Lotus. People were complaining, well, why are you making this expensive sports car. With the implication that we thought there was a shortage of sports cars for rich people and we were racing to meet that unmet need. The real reason is that, any car that we make at low volume, which is the first version of the technology, is going to be expensive. It didn't matter what that car looked like. So if we made something that looked like a very standard Toyota Corolla or a Ford Fusion or something like that, and it would have cost, say, $70,000. Nobody will pay that for what looks like a mid-sized economy sedan. They just won't. Or very few people would, but people are willing to pay $100,000 for a fast sports car. That's why we started off at that level, and with another big design iteration and an increase in volume, so we had economies of scale, we were able to create the Model-S, and with another order of magnitude increase in volume and another big design revision, that's what will allow us to cut the price in half again. Tesla also supplies power trains to Mercedes and Toyota, and we'll perhaps do that for other car companies, in an effort to help them accelerate the transition to electric vehicles.That's Tesla and SpaceX and I should mention Solar City. One must generate electricity in a sustainable way, as well as consume it in a sustainable way. People will say, well, don't electric cars create pollution at the power plant level? It should be noted that, for any given source fuel, it is always better to generate the power at the power plant level and then charge electric cars and run them, for any given source fuel, because power plant are much more efficient at extracting energy than internal combustion engines in a car. They are at least twice as efficient and usually more like three times as efficient. So, for any given source fuel, even if the whole world were always going to be powered by hydrocarbons, it would still make sense to do electric cars. But, of course, we must find a sustainable means of generating energy as well, and I think that the most likely, well, the main candidate for sustainable energy generation is actually solar. I think that this is actually rather obvious because the Earth is almost entirely solar powered today, as it is. We'd be a frozen ice ball at, I don't know, three or four kelvin, if it weren't for the sun and our entire system of precipitation is powered by the sun. The ecosystem is almost entirely, 99.999% powered by the sun, except for some chemotrobes at the bottom of the ocean. It's rather obvious that one should try to take a little portion of that energy, and it's actually not much, and convert that into electricity for use by society.I'm quite confident that solar power will be the single largest source of electrical energy for humanity in the future. It will be combined with other things, of course, such as hydro power, geothermal, and I actually think nuclear is not a terrible option, so long as you're not located in a place that's susceptible to natural disasters. That, also I think, defies common sense. So long as there are not huge earthquakes or weather systems that have names coming at you, then I think nuclear can be a sensible option. There are much safer and better ways of generating nuclear energyI'm talking fission herethan existed in the past when nuclear reactors first came out. At some point in the future it would be nice to make fusion work, of course. That'd be quite good, but in the mean time I think indirect fusion, being solar power, is a good thing to do. That's what Solar City is doing, it's really trying to improve the economics of solar power, and they're doing a great job. I don't run the company, so the credit really goes to the two key guys who run that company. They're doing a great job of really accelerating the good option of solar power in the United States, and hopefully they'll come to the UK as well.That's about it. So we have Q and A. Absolutely. In fact, the energy density, basically the amount of energy you can store in a given amount of mass or volume, has been a fundamental constraint on electric cars for a while and that's correlated to some degree with the cost per kWh, the cost of storing that energy in the car. With the advent of lithium-ion technology, that I think, is really what enabled a compelling car and lithium-ion batteries continue to improve. Roughly, on average, maybe 8% or 9% per year. Which, when compounded over several years, ends up being a meaningful improvement. As mentioned in my talk, even if there was no fundamental improvement beyond lithium-ion batteries, I think we could still take all terrestrialall ground transportation could go electric. We do need a further breakthrough for aircraft, where the energy density requirements are at least 2 to 3 times more significant but, even with current generation lithium-ion, we could go to mass market with ground vehicles. In fact, our focus is really more on reducing the cost of the battery pack than improving the energy density.So, I think we're actually in a pretty good spot and I am reasonably optimistic that there will be a breakthrough in high energy density capacitors. It's sort of interesting. If you do the basic physics on the energy density potential of a capacitor, using naturally occurring materials, it's quite hard to beat lithium-ion batteries, but if you can figure out a way to makeunnatural materials I suppose, that are accurate at the molecular level then I think you can have some fairly significant breakthroughs. The ability to do that was developed in the photonics arena and applying those photonics breakthroughs to capacitor technology is what has the potential for a really big breakthrough there. So, I think we may see something on that level, but it isn't entirely required for cars.For rockets, well, there's no way to make a rocket electric. That's for sure. Unfortunately, Newton's third law cannot be escapedI think. Certainly, there'd have to be a few Nobel prizes awarded if there was a way to get around it. That'd be really convenient. I do think it's possible, with a really efficient combustion rocket, to achieve the settlement of Mars. I think we'll probably want to switch to methaneeither methane or hydrogen, they're kind of the best two choices, and probably slightly leaning in the direction of methane because it's easier to handle than hydrogen. Methane is CH4 verses H2. Both can be produced on the surface of Mars, which is important. I should say that I'm quite confident at this point that it is possible to create a self-sustaining civilization on Mars using only a methane or hydrogen based launch systemit needs to be a fully reusable methane or hydrogen based launch system and it can be done. The key I was trying to figure out was, with volume, is it possible to get the cost of moving to Mars down to under half a million dollars, which is I think isno-one can argue about the exact threshold, but I think that is about the threshold which enough people would save up money and move to Mars. I mean, that's how America got created, basically. They can come back if they like, if they don't like it, of course. You get a free return ticket. There's sometimes a debate about going to Mars one-way and whether that makes things easier, and I think for the initial flights perhaps, but long term, to get the cost down, you need the spacecraft back. Whether the people come back is irrelevant, but you must have the ship back because those things are expensive. So anyone who wants to return can just jump on. But until a few years ago, I wasn't sure that success was one of the possible outcomes and now I'm quite sure that success is possible. Of course, there's a long way between possible and making it real, but I believe it is possible.And then robotics, right. I think one can accomplish a lot with robotics. I do slightly worry about, if robotics get too good, what's the point of us? I think, either robotics get so good and there's not much point to us, I guess, I don't know, or they're not as good as us, in which case, we need to go. I'd advocate the second. Hopefully, in the future, there's not some AI apocalypse. We still have the original mule one of Tesla Roadster and here I should give credit to a small company in southern California called AC Propulsion that had a vehicle called the T-Zero. Our very first mule was really taking a Lotus Elise and jamming an AC Propulsion power train into it and then making it drive. We originally thought thatit's another example of making some dumb mistakes but the thought at the beginning of Tesla was to use AC Propulsion's power train in a Lotus Elise and to get to market fast with an electric car. As it turned out, the AC Propulsion power train didn't really work, very well, and was not scalable for productionhad a lot of issuesand so we had to completely redesign the power train and then, the Elise, because our car ended up being 50% heavier and had different weight distribution, and low points, we invalidate all the crash structure and had to completely redesign the chassis. In the end, I think about 7% of the parts were in common with the Elise. So, almost nothing, but we actually inherited some of the limitations of the Elise. Long winded answer, I'll try to be less long winded in my answers.With respect to air breathing hybrid stages, I have not seen how the physics of that makes sense. There may be some assumptions that I have that are incorrect, but really, for an orbital rocket, you're trying to get out of the atmosphere as soon as possible because the atmosphere is just as thick as soup when you're trying to go fast, and it's not helped by the fact that the atmosphere is mostly not oxygen. It's 80% nitrogen. So, mostly what you're air breathing is chaff, not wheat, and having a big intake is like having a giant brake. The braking effect tends to overwhelm the advantage of ingesting 20% oxidizer. You could just make the boost stage 5% to 10% larger and get rid of all the air breathing stuff and you're done. That's a good point. New technology and innovation can have a downside and one of the downsides is people are able to extract far more hydrocarbons than we thought were possible. Once you start getting into deep methane, or deep natural gas, you're actually tapping into things that are not related to dinosaur fossils. Methane is a naturally occurring gas. There are places in the solar system where the atmosphere is primarily methane. So, it does not require an organic origin. If we dig too deep for methane, we're actually going to a level that has never been seen before, not even in the very earliest history of Earth. So that's very dangerous I think. That's why I think it's important for electric cars to be able to compete without an economic benefactor. But, I think, it is very dangerous to be extracting vast quantities of hydrocarbons from deep within the Earth and putting them in the atmosphere. Sooner or later, something very bad will happen. There are a lot of people, particularly in the US, who are vehemently against electric cars and sustainable power, and it's quite difficult to reason with them, actually. They'll say, well, some scientists don't think it's a problem and I'm like, okay, well, you can find someone reputable who will disagree with anything. This actually reminds me of the tobacco industry where, for the longest time, there were actuallyyou'd see ads where they would claim that tobacco is healthy for youI know, hard to believe these days. There were these reports, where there seemed to be some correlation between lung cancer and smoking, and they were like, our scientists have conducted experiments and they show there is no relation between those, it's complete nonsense. It got to the point where almost any reasonable scientist would say, yes, of course, smoking causes lung cancer and all sorts of other bad things. Not definitively, but it's extremely likely, and yet the tobacco industry would still say, oh, scientists disagree, because 1% or 2% of the scientific community didn't feel that way. The public just hears: scientists disagree. They don't hear: 99% of them think it's stupid. It's definitely a tough thing and hopefully that transition occurs before it's too late. There's already quite a bit of momentum in the direction of climate change, and accelerating the removal of hydrocarbons from the crust and placing them in the atmosphere is, I think, just very unwise. That's why I think it's the biggest problem of the 21st century. I think I'm going to stay on electric cars and rockets for a while. It was actually never my intent to run Tesla, because running two companies is quite a burden, actually. I sometimes run into people who think, oh, if you're CEO of the company then they sort of imagine themselves, if they were CEO of the company, they would grant themselves lots of vacation and do lots of fun things. It's doesn't quite work that way. What you actually get is, a distillation of the worst things going on in the company. So, the idea of taking on something more, is very frightening. Possibly, at some point in the future, certainly not the near term, there's an opportunity to create an electric jet, eventually. I do think I want to create an electric jet that is really exciting. Something that would be supersonic, vertical takeoff and landing, pure electric, and just a big leap forward. I'm quite confident it's doable, provided that there's a rough doubling of the energy density in batteries or capacitors. Basically, around the 500W/kg level is where it starts to make sense. I do think there's the possibility of a fifth mode of transport which I've mentioned tangentially, which I call the Hyperloop. I'd like to publish something about that, maybe in the next month or two, once Tesla is at steady state production, and I want to flesh it out a bit so that I can pre-address some of the rebuttals that people will come up with, rather than just put it out there and then have the rebuttal occur and have an unaddressed rebuttal. I guess a way to think of it is, it's like a cross between a Concorde and a rail gun. The full answer is quite complicated and requires at least some understanding of how rockets work, but if you divide a rocket into the cost of the engines, the air frame and the electronics, and then the launch operation itself, those are the marginal cost drivers and then there's the fixed cost of the company, which you divide over the number of launches that take place, but just looking at the marginal cost drivers, it means you have to make a significant advancement in engines, air frame and electronics and launch operation. In fact, it would be easy to point out one of those areas but success in one of those areas would only have a small effect. So, let's say you had free engines, well that would only reduce the cost of the rocket by, probably, 30%the cost of launch by 30%. That's not a huge breakthrough. Or free electronics. Or free air frame. You actually have to compress all of them quite a bit, and then, like I said, you have to make them reusable.I can give an illustrative example in the air frame. That may be helpful. The normal way that a rocket air frame is constructed, is machined iso-grid. That's where you take high strength, aluminum alloy plate and you machine integral stiffeners into the plate. This is probably going to go slightly technical, but imagine you have a plate of metal and you're just cutting triangles out of it. That's normally how rockets are made. Most of a rocket is propellant tanks, these things have to be sealed to maintain pressure, and they have to be quite stiff. The approach that we took is, rather, to build it up. To start with thin sections and friction stir weld stiffeners into the thin sections. This is a big improvement because if you machine away the material you're left with maybe 5% of the original material. So, a 20 to 1, roughly, wastage of material, plus a lot of machining time. It's very expensive. If you can roll sheet, and stir weld the stiffeners in, then your material wastage can be 5%. That's the inverse, essentially. Instead of having a 20 to 1 ratio, you have got 1.1 ratio. Instead of having 95% wastage, it's 5% wastage. It's a huge improvement. You can actually improve the mass fraction too, because if you have stir welded stiffeners, you can increase the profile and improve the geometry of the stiffeners so you can have something which is, say, 5cm tall whereas, if you machined it from a plate, it'd be limited to the thickness of the plate which may only be 2cm or 3cm tall. You actually end up with something which is both more advanced, in that it is better mass fraction, but is also a fraction of the cost. That's one example, but there are many such things. I think the thing we need to do is, we needthe best thing to do to achieve thatwould be a carbon tax. The market system will work extremely well if it has the right informationto work. If we just apply a tax to carbon and then dial that up according to whatever achieves the target maximum carbon proportion in the atmosphere that's, I think, the right way to go. Countries really need to act unilaterally. We can't have this thing where such and such country isn't doing it, I'm not doing it. Well, okay, set a good example and hopefully, over time, other countries will fall in line, or get ostracized. I think that's probably the smart move, and then we can avoidthere's no need for subsidies and special incentives which are really a backwards way of trying to deal with the lack of a carbon tax. I think, in the good scenario, the best possible scenario would be that something like that is instituted. We're still going to have a significant increase in the amount of carbon in the atmosphere, temperatures are still going to rise, sea levels are still going to rise butthe Dutch can manage, you know, witha lot of dyke companies will, you know, there's a lot of options in the dyke business. I think, if we take action reasonably soon, we can avoid a calamitous outcome. If we only take action towards the end of the century, then it's going to be extremely bad. I don't think people quite appreciate the fact that there's the momentum of climate change, you know. Even if we immediately stop all carbon production, the momentum will still carry forward and increase the temperature, raise water levels, make storms more powerful, all those things. I'm trying.. what's the good outcome? The good outcome is, we do carbon tax, we minimize the carbon production, we move to sustainable transportation and energy production, which I said, is going to be like solar, wind, geothermal, hydro, and some nuclear, I think we have to accept that nuclear is a good option, in certain places. I actually think that the most likely outcome is a reasonably good one where there's damage but we recover. I actually think that will occur. I'm quite optimistic about the future. I'm not suggesting complacency in the least, but I'm optimistic about the future. I actually think, as long as the sun is shining, we'll be fine. If humanity had to get all of its energy from the sun, it could do so. There's truly an astounding amount of energy that comes at us from the sun. It's interestingif you took the land area used by nuclear plants, including the stay-out zones and everything, and said, okay, what generates more power, the nuclear power plant or just covering it with solar panels? In most cases, it's solar panels. Just the area used by the nuclear power plant, in solar panels would generate more energy because you actually have to have a big stay-out zone, you can't just put a nuclear power plant in the outer suburbs, with a bunch of people around it, so you have to have this big clear zone and so, they use a lot of area. But just to give you a sense of how much power can come from the sun, this is literally true, what I've just said. Just by process of elimination. Mercury is obviously just way too close to the sun. They may be some mere habitable zone on the back side of Mercury, but I think one’s sort of asking for trouble on that one. Venus would be a lesson for what Earth could become in worst case scenario. A superheated, high pressureand, in the case of Venusacid bath. It’s literally a high pressure, high temperate acid bath. Definitely not a good place. I think the longest that even any probe has lasted on Venus is measured in hours. The Moon is close, but it’s a very small rock, you know, that’s just circling Earth, with no atmosphere, very limited amounts of water ice that are in permanently shadowed craters, and it’s got a 28 day rotational cycle which isn’t great for plants. It would be quite tough to make a self-sustaining civilization on the Moon. So then, coming to Mars, it’s definitely a fix-er-up-er of a planet. It’s not perfect, but feasible. It’s got a rotational period of 24.5 hoursremarkably similar to Earth. It’s got just under half Earth’s gravityso it’s a lot closer gravitationally. It’s got a lot of water icealmost all of Mars has water, bound up in ice form, in the soil. The soil has turned out to be non-toxic, it’s be found by probes that we’ve sent there. If you had a greenhouse and some fertilizer, and you just warmed things up and pressurized it a little bit, then you could grow plants on Mars. Mars has a CO2 atmosphere which plants like to consume. Plant’s consume CO2 and, on net, give you oxygen. I think it’s very doable to create a self-sustaining Mars base and then, ultimately, terraform the planet to make it like Earthso we could just walk around outdoors. Obviously, that’s a longer term project, but it is within the realm of possibility. Going beyond that, you’re going to Jupiter and the asteroids. You could potentially do something on the moons of Jupiter or Saturn, but that’s way harder than Mars. I think space exploration is going to be a mixture of private and government activities. In fact, for SpaceX, there are many things we want to do to enable scientific missions and enable NASA and JPL and ESA and others to be able to do much more for a given budget. In fact, we’ve had a number of conversations with JPL, which is located quite close to SpaceX, about using our Falcon rocket and Dragon spacecraftversion two of the Dragon spacecraft will have propulsive landing capabilities, so version two of the Dragon spacecraft will be able to land on any liquid or solid surface in the solar system. There’s potential to turn that into a generalized science instrument delivery platform, for anywhere in the solar system. You could see then how one could figure out how to do a sample return. You know, if you were to land Dragon and have a smaller sample return rocket housed within the Dragon spacecraft, that could return some martian regolith, that’d be pretty cool. So, we’re exploring some ideas there and I think we’ll see at least some science missions being done in the futuremaybe a lot of them. We’re still at the early stage but we do have JASON-3 which a joint NASA-ESA mission that’s going to be launched on one of our rockets in about two years and, of course, we’re resupplying the space station. So, I think it’s going to be a mixture of government and commercial. I’m for whatever means will make it happen. I’m not hot over government or commercial, just whatever works for all practical purposes. I don’t think it’s going to be economical to mine things on Mars and then transport them back to Earth because the transport costs would overwhelm the value of whatever you mined, but there will likely be a lot of mining on Mars that’s useful for a Mars base, but it’s unlikely to be transferred back to Earth. I think the economic exchange between a Mars base and Earth would be mostly in the form of intellectual property. Anything that can be transmitted by photon, that’s the most likely exchange of things that will occur. I don’t think we need to worry too much about the exploitation of Mars, essentially. I mean, that would be a high class problem to deal with, for sure. I’m not the biggest fan of biofuels because I try to look at things and just calculate the basic physics of it, really elementary stuff, and say, okay, well, what percentage of the incident sunlight is bound up in usable chemical energy and then once you have that chemical energy, how much of that is then translated into electricity? You have to compare that total efficiency with just having solar panels. Unless I’ve made some really dumb mistake, which is possible, you’re about a hundred times off with biofuels. I mean, at least two orders of magnitude. What it boils down to is what’s square meter per electricity generated? With the best case biofueltake every assumption and maximize it, so don’t say, don’t worry, maybe somebody could invent something better, say what is the bestjust envelope the whole thing. Say you had unbelievably efficient plants. I mean, you can’t violate any laws of thermodynamics, but assuming that you’re at the limits of thermodynamics in all those cases, then biofuelsat least your land-based biofuelsthere’s no way this makes sense. You end up being around, maybe, 0.2% efficient in turning sunlight into electrical energy, whereas commercial solar panels are 20% efficient. So why would you ever do biofuels? It’s not as though there are large swaths of arable land unused. You have to say, well, if you go with biofuels, it’s going to either result in wilderness being cultivated or an increase in food prices. You can also say, is it possible, if you stopped all food production in the world, to generate enough energy to meet the world’s needs? Like, yeah, you could probablyit’s about right, actually, if you stopped all food production you could just about meet the world’s energy needs. Now, there is a possibility of ocean-based, because Earth’s surface is mostly ocean. So, if you could find a way tomaybe some sort of ocean algae-based solution where you’re unconstrained by surface area, although I still think you’d have to compare that to a bunch of floating solar panels and I think you still lose on floating solar panels. I don’t see how it would make sense.At some point, there will have to be improvements to the electricity grid, but because there’s a huge disparity in the peak energy use during the day and the energy use at night, and most charging of electric cars occurs at nightwe have a quite strong empirical basis for concluding this, because we can look at all our customers and plot their energy usage and it’s very predominately at night. It’s basically just like your cell phone, you go home, you plug it in and it charges overnight. The electricity grid has to be sized for the worst second of the worst day of the worst year with some power plants not functioning. Well, that’s how the electricity grid should be sized. Sometimes it doesn’t work out that way. Most the time you have huge amounts of excess capacity. In the US there was a study donethere’s studies done on all sorts of things, some of them are complete nonsense, I love the words ‘studies say..’ but I think this study is probably accuratethat you could replace about 70% of the passenger milesin the United States, at least, I don’t know how to apply that to Britainbut about 70% of the passenger miles with no change to the grid. Assuming charging predominately at night. If you combine that with increased use of solar panels on houses and businesses, you have localized power generation, and the nice thing about solar power is it tends to match energy usage. Just generating power during the day and that’s when you tend to use the most power. Particularly on summer days when you have air conditioning running. Air conditioning is a huge consumer of electricity. You generally only need it when it’s warm and sunnythat’s when you need it most. I think we’re okay on the grid front, at least for the near future, it’s only going to become a problem once, let’s say, electric vehicles are at least approaching 10% or 20% of the vehicles on the road and then, I think, you’ll be able to address the problem on a fairly localized basis. I wanted to hear from others that had a strong philanthropic initiative. I wanted to hear what they were doing. What was successful, what was unsuccessful. So as to better inform things that I do. I did. One of the things that we have agreed to here is that we would not discuss the specifics of conversations because obviously if someone is talking about something that they did that wasn’t successful, that is a little embarrassing, so you don’t want..  There was, and as the saying goes, if you try a bunch of things you often learn more from failure than from success.In my case, the three areas that I’m focused on are space exploration, solar energy and electric cars. I actually did create those business because I felt those were important needs that had to be solved. They were certainly not picked because I thought they were the highest return on investment. I think, intuitively that most people would agree with that. Having heard of Solyndra and other issues in solar power, that wouldn’t be high on the list. Nor would car companies, given that the next youngest car company in America is 90 years old. Also, rockets are not an area where there’s been a lot of commercial/private success. Very fortunately, all three seem to be doing well. I think I could have made a lot more money from, say, selling another Internet company. Well, I think part of it is that people have started becoming wealthy at an early age, and so there’s been more of an opportunity to give away wealth if you’ve obtained it earlier in life. I think it is for the Internet. It’s a lot harder to build wealth in other businesses where there’s large physical objects that need to be made. For example, with SpaceX we’ve got to make these giant rockets, it’s taken 10 years to get SpaceX to this point where it’s of a value perhaps comparable to what we sold Paypal to eBay for after three and a half years. I am, actually. I think that there’s a lot of opportunity in solar. There have been, besides Solyndra, a lot of solar companies that have either seen a collapse in their market value or have died, but I think it is a very important area and it’s very important that there be successes in that arena, because we have to have sustainable energy. That’s why I’ve put my capital to work in that regard, even though it’s not probably the place where it could earn the highest return. I think things are going reasonably well. We’re going to be in production with our sedan next month. So we’ll start our first customer deliveries next month. With next technologies there does seem to be this ebb and flow of excitement about it. At first it’ll seem it’s not working and then it will seem like it is. So it’s sort of like an upwards sloping sine wave. So long as there are companies that are driving the technology forward, as Tesla is, that sine wave will continue to be upward sloping. I think, in the next several years, we’re actually going to see a huge increase in the number of electric cars. “Tesla, in the second half of this year, will produce more electric cars than it has produced in its entire lifetime to date. I feel very confident predicting that, within 20 years, the majority of new cars produced will be fully electric, and it may be closer to 10 years than 20.” Essentially, we’re going to put a lot of satellites into orbit. For a wide range of customers. We’ll be doing a lot of cargo resupply missions to the space station. In about three years we’ll be launching astronauts. Hopefully, three or four years, but hopefully closer to three. We’ll be launching our Falcon Heavy which will be the most powerful rocket in the world by a factor of two. In the longer term, perhaps in the 10 to 15 year time frame, I’m hopeful that we’ll have a craft that can take people to Mars because the ultimate goal of SpaceX is to develop the technologies that can take humanity to Mars. I’d like to go to Mars, absolutely. “I think it would be great to be born on Earth and to die on Mars. Just hopefully not at the point of impact.”Thanks for having me.Thank you for having me. Okay, there was quite a lot. Well, what we're seeing there isand, like, our communications team just put it together so I just saw it for the first time in the back there. There's probably a little bit too much slow-mo. What we're seeing there is our Falcon 9 rocket and our Dragon spacecraft and we're seeing some of the initial tests of the reusable version of Falcon 9 that is capable of taking off and landing. Which isreusability is really, I think, the critical breakthrough needed in rocketry to take things to the next level.  Well, we've been able to soft-land the rocket booster in the ocean twice, so far. Unfortunately, it sort of sat there for a couple of seconds and then tipped over and exploded. Yeahlike that it's quite difficult to reuse. Unfortunatelyit's as tall as a 14 story building, so when a 14 story building falls over it's quite a belly flop. So, what we need to do is be able to either land on a floating platform or, ideally, boost back to launch site and land back at the launch site. But before we boost back to the launch site, and try to land there, we need to show that we can land with precision, over and over again. Ya know, otherwise something bad could happen, if it doesn't boost back to where we intended. For the upcoming launch, I think we've got a chance of landing on a floating landing platform. We actually have a huge platform that's being constructed at a shipyard in Louisiana right now. Which iswell, it's huge, huge-ish, it's about 300 feet long by 170 feet wide. That looks very tiny from space, and the leg span of the rocket is 60 feet, and this is going to be positioning itself out in the ocean with engines that will try to keep it in a particular positionbut it's tricky, you've got to deal with these big rollers and GPS errors. It's not anchored, because it's out in the Atlantic. But we're going to try to land on that on the next flight and if we land on that I think we'll be able to refly that booster, but it's probably not more than a 50% chance or less of landing it on the platform for the first time, but there's a lot of launches that will occur over the next year. So there's at least a dozen launches that will occur over the next 12 months and I think it's quite likely, probably 80% to 90% likely that one of those flights will be able to land and refly. So, I think we're quite close. There's a couple of reasons. The longterm ambition of SpaceX is to develop the technologies necessary to establish a self-sustaining city on Mars, or civilization on Mars, and wings and a runway don't really work if you're going somewhere other than Earth. Ya know, the Moon doesn't have an atmosphere, so wings and wheels arethere's no runway and there's no atmosphere. Not a good choice for the Moon. Then, on Mars, there are also no runways, and the atmosphere is very thin. So, unless you like trying to land something at supersonic velocity, it's just not a good choice for Mars either. You basically have to go with propulsive landing if you want to go someplace other than Earth, which is why you have rockets, because obviously aircraft work quite well on Earth, but even for Earth recovery, when you really look at it, even if other planets had atmospheres the penalty for propulsive landing quite low. You can just do an easy calculation of what's the terminal velocity and then how long you have to fire the engine, at what g-level, to get to zero velocity. If you then do some interesting things, like look at our landing gear, they're essentially like giant body flaps, so the dragwhen we deploy the landing gear, the drag massively increases, so we have dual use of the landing gear as giant body flaps and as landing gear. That actually cuts the terminal velocity in half and therefore the fuelthe propellant we need to stop the vehicle in half, and actually it's quite an efficient method of landing precisely. You use less mass if you want to use parachutes to a water landing, but then reusability is negatively affected. The next generation vehicles after the Falcon architecture will be designed for full reusability. I don't expect the Falcon 9 to have a reusable upper stage, just because thewith a kerosene-based system, the specific impulse isn't really high enough to do that, and a lot of the missions we do for commercial satellite deployment are geostationary missions. So, we're really going very far out. These are high delta-velocity missions, so to try to get something back from that is really difficult. But, with the next generation of vehicles, which is going to be asub-cooled methane/oxygen system where the propellants are cooled close to their freezing temperature to increase the density, we could definitely do full reusabilityand that system is intended to be a fully reusable Mars transportation system. So, not merely to low Earth orbit but all the way to Mars and back, with full reusability.  Ha. I am an optimistic person, butI think we could expect to see some test flights in the five or six year time frame. But, we're talking about a much bigger vehicle, and we're also going to be upgrading to a new generationa harder engine cycle, which is a full-flow staged combustion. What we have right now is an open cycle engine. Right now, I'd say, engines are our weakest point at SpaceX, but they will become as strong as the structures and avionics in the next generation. Sure, but let me just clarify a point. I think, right now our weakest point is engines with respect to specific impulse, but not with respect to thrust-to-weight. We actually have the highest thrust-to-weight of any engine, I think maybe ever, but our specific impulse, the efficiency of the engine is about 10% worse than a staged-combustion engine using the same propellant. In terms of our competitiveness, I think it mostly comes down to our pace of innovation. Our pace of innovation is much much faster than the big aerospace companies or the country-driven systems. This is generally true, if you look at innovation from large companies or smaller companies, smaller companies are generally better at innovating than the larger companies and it has to be that way from a Darwinian standpoint as smaller companies would just die if they didn't try innovating because otherwise people would just keep buying the product from the big company. So, then, why is SpaceX more innovative? I think it's probably because we've got a super-engineering driven culture. We're running sort of the Silicon Valley operating system. It's kind of hard to describe. Like, how do you describe Linux. Ya know, like Linux is more efficient than some other operating systems, but to explain exactly why, you really have to get into the weeds. But, you sort of have a very flat hierarchy, you promote rapid communication, a best-idea-wins cultureas opposed the the having the seniority of the person decide the solution, whichthat should never be the case in engineering, it should always be a rational basis. I also believe that at the leadership level, I'd much rather promote someone that has strong engineering ability than so-called management ability. We do hire some MBAs but it's usually in spite of the MBA, not because of it. Well, it is a chicken and egg situation, the reason why there's low demand for spaceflight is because it's ridiculously expensive, and so at some point someone has to say, okay, we're going to make something that's much more affordable and then see what applications develop. That's what has to happen. The situation in rocketry is like if an aircraftimagine if aircraft were single use, then how many people would fly? The flight rate would be really low. If you buy a 757 it's like $250M, or maybe $300M, and you need two of them for a round-trip. No-one is paying half-a-billion dollars to fly from Boston to London, and if that were the case there'd be like a very small number of flights for scientific and military purposes and people would say, wow, the market for aircraft is so tiny, people really love going by boatit's nonsense. If we have rockets that are reusable, we couldfully-reusable and can get to a decent flight rate, the potential is there to get a two order of magnitude reduction in the cost of space transport, which is, I think, vital for establishment of a self-sustaining civilization on another planet or even on the Moon or some sort of L5 colony or whatever, but you really need to get the cost downwe need a two order of magnitude improvement, at least, in the cost of transport. In fact, relative to the estimates of what it costs to do a manned Mars mission, I think like some of the lower estimates are at the $100B to $200B level, for a four person mission, we need more like a 10,000 fold reduction. I mean, so people can afford to go. Yeah, private spaceflight is going to be some amount of market. Yeah, I don't really know. We're just trying to advance rocket technology andI mean, on the one hand, if we get even slightly towards the overarching goal of Mars colonization technology level, if we just get slightly there, we certainly have a viable business in launching satellites and servicing the space station, that kind of thing, becauseyeah, like, even for like 5%there's still a viable business doing Earth orbit and we're vastly more competitive than the other rocket companies. We do have a lot of people ganging up against us these days. I don't think the Moon is a necessary step, but I think if you've got a rocket and spacecraft capable of going to Mars, you might as well go to the Moon as wellit's along the way. That's like crossing the English Channel, relative to Mars. So, it's like, if you have these ships that could cross the Atlantic, would you cross the English Channel? Probably. It's definitely not necessary, but you'd probably end up having a Moon base just because, like, why not, ya know. It terms of the key technologies, obviously it would be great to have some sort of fundamental new thing that's never existed before and pushes the boundaries of physics, that'd be great, but as far as the physics that we know today, I actually think we've got the basic ingredientsthey're there. I mean, if you do a densified liquid methalox rocket with on-orbit refueling, so like you load the spacecraft into orbit and then you send a whole bunch of refueling missions to fill up the tanks and you have the Mars colonial fleetessentiallythat gets built up during the time between Earth-Mars synchronizations, which occur every 26 months, then the fleet all departs at the optimal transfer point. I think we havewe don't need any sort of thing that people don't already know about, I believe. I believe we've got the building blocks, but the mass efficiency is extremely important. So, having better heat shields, that obviously are reusable.  Yeah, things that can mitigate the radiation effects would be certainlyI think the radiation effects are way overblown because, ya know, people went to the Moon. We went like two weeks in deep space. Buzz Aldrin's still around. So obviously they're still alive and they seem okay. Ya know, people have been up in the space station for like a year or more. They're okay. I think there are things we can do to mitigate the radiation on-route, by effectively placement of the water you bring with youput that in the direction of the Sun. But yeah, I really think we have the essential ingredients, but we do need an efficient propellant depot on Mars, but I think is really like, there's a lot of hard work and engineering that needs to be done, but it's there. Like, the pieces are there. Yeah, yeah, I think that'd belike, we have rovers on Mars already, so I think we'll see more robots on Mars and we'll probably want to make sure the propellant depot worksit'd be an automated propellant depot and there is some question as to, what do you do for power generation on Mars? Do you have a nuclear reactor? Then you've got to carry the nuclear fuel there, and reactors are fairly heavy. Do you do some lightweight solar power system? Like, maybe big inflatable solar arrays or something like that. So, just power generation on Mars, I think is an interesting problem, and then just figuring out how to get all the bits of efficiency right for creating, say, methane and oxygen on Mars. Ya know, Mars has got a CO2 atmosphere and there's a lot of water buried in the soil that you can get to. I think there's plenty of people who will sign up for a one-way trip to Mars. It'd certainly be enough, but I think the question is, is it a one-way mission and then you die, or is it a one-way mission and you get resupplied, that's a big difference. I think it ends up being a moot point because you want to bring the spaceship back. These spaceships are expensive, okay, they're hard to build. You can't just leave them there. So whether or not people want to come back or not, is kind oflike, they can just jump on if they want, but we need the spaceship back. I mean, it'd be kind of weird if there's this huge collection of spaceships on Mars over time. It'd be like, maybe we should send them backno, of course we should send them back. Particularly if we want to have a colony of some kind that's of significant size. Yeah, well that's why I think we should really be setting the goal as the creation of a self-sustaining civilization on Mars, not simply a mission to Mars because then we riskyeah, it'd be awesome and cool and it'd be a new high altitude record and great pictures and stuff, but it would beit's just not the thing that fundamentally changes the future of humanity. I should sort of explain, perhaps, the rationale for, ya know, why I think it's important to establish a self-sustaining colony on Mars. Some people are aware of that, but probably most people aren't and you hear all these rebuttals, like aren't there all these problems on Earth that we need to deal with, and shouldn't we focus on that, and the answer is yes, our primary focus should be the problems on Earth but I think that there should be some small amount that's given over to the establishment of a colony on Mars and making life multi-planetary. By a small amount, I mean some number less than 1% of our resources. So, it's not as important as, say, health care, but it's more important than let's say, cosmetics. I'm in favor of cosmetics, I like them, they're great, but ya know, lipstick or colony on Mars. People may have different opinions, I know. I think we should have that, because the future of humanity will fundamentally bifurcate along the lines of either a single planet species or a multi-planet species, and a multi-planet version of humanity's future is going to last a lot longer. We'll propagate civilization in the future far longer if we're a multi-planet species than if we're a single planet species. So it's like planetary redundancy, backing up the biosphere. We've got all of our eggs in one basket here. We should try to protect that basket with everything we can but there's some risks that are just extremely difficult to mitigate and some which we will ultimately not be able to mitigate. So, it just seems like the right thing to do, and then the next question is should we do it now, or should we wait for some point in the future, and I think the wise move is to do it now because the window of technology for this is open and it's the first time that window's been open in the 4.5 billion year history of Earth. That's a long time. I certainly hope that the window will be open forever, but it may also close. If you look at the history of technology of various civilizationsif you look at, say, ancient Egypt where they were able to build these incredible giant pyramids, and then they forgot how to build the pyramids and then they couldn't read hieroglyphics, or you look at Roman civilization, they were able to build these incredible aqueducts and roads and then they forgot how to do that. They had indoor plumbing, and they forgot how to do indoor plumbing. There's clearly been a cycle with technology. Hopefully, that's an upward sloping sine wave that continues on to be really great in the future, but maybe it doesn't. Maybe there's some bad thing that happens. So, for 1% of our resources we could buy life insurance for life, collectively, and I think that would be a good thing to do. The Gigafactory is like the least bad solution we could up with, honestly. I think it's actually pretty cool the way it's worked out, but we're just faced with a simple problem of: it we want to make electric cars we need enough batteries for the electric cars, and last year, all Lithium-Ion battery production combined was 30 GWhs, approximately. That's nothing, okay, or at least, it's nothing when you consider if you want to make half a million electric cars a year, that's how much you need. There are a hundred million new cars made every year. There are two billion gasoline or diesel cars on the road worldwide. So, just do the basic math, you don't just need one Gigafactory, you need like 200 Gigafactories, just for new car production and that means you're only going to replace the fleet at the existing rate which has it refreshed every 20 years. So yeah. Given that we want try to get to full capacity at a Fremont plant in California of a half million vehicles a year, we need a half million vehicles a year of batteries, and obviously we can't use all of the other factories in the world combined because people want cellphones and laptops and other things. Therefore we have to build this factory and we have a great partner in Panasonic. They're taking care of the cell formation part of it. There are actually many aspects to this, because you have anode, cathode, electrolyte, can, at the precursor level you've got raw materials coming in from the mines that feed into a variety of other companies like Simitar Mining and Atarchie and others, they do the precursor processing and then Panasonic takes the anode and cathode materials separately and put that into a cell and then it goes into a Tesla section which creates the module, which is all the electronics and the packaging and the conductors, the safety mechanisms and the cooling loops and then the modules go into the pack which has a lot of crash structure associated with it and then the pack goes in the car. Then, obviously, Tesla is the landlord of the whole thing as well. Anyway, short of doing that, there was no way to scale, so that's why we did it. Sure, I love the idea of electric aircraft. Everything will go fully electric, except for rockets. Which is ironic.  Wha? No. Wait, when you say 10 to 100, off what baseline? What do you mean?  Oh no. Definitely not. In my opinion at least, where we are right now is roughly for a cell which doesn't have lots of other drawbacks, which people always forget to mention when they talk about battery breakthroughs, there's many parameters that are important for a battery and hardly a week goes by when there's not some huge breakthrough, allegedly, in batteries but the bullshit factor is outrageous. But, for real cells, which actually work, and don't have some huge drawback, they're currently at about 300 Wh/kg, and to have a compelling aircraft, you only need about 400 Wh/kg, provided the percentage of cell on the aircraft is high. It doesn't need to be anywhere near as high as it is on a rocket, but if it's at sort of at the 70% level at 400 Wh/kg, you can do very decent range. If you move it up to the mid to high 70s, you can go transcontinentalnot intercontinental, but sort of west coast to east coast. So, you need an efficient aircraft, but that's approximately, by my calculations, the numbers you needwhich I think is an achievable number. Aircraft have all these unnecessary things like tails and rudders and elevatorsnot needed. Just gimbal.. anyway.. gimbal the electric fan. For some weird reason gimbaling motors is normal in rockets and not in aircraft. Why not?  I've been sort of toying with the design for an electric supersonic vertical take-off and landing electric aircraft for a while, I'd love to do it, but I think my mind would explode. It'd be like, brain's worn out, ya know. I'm pretty saturated working on electric cars and rockets. Well, they're doing great. In fact, we want to hire a lot more people from MIT. Definitely, apply to SpaceX or apply to Tesla, and yell at me on Twitter if there's something wrong with our admissions process or something. I mean, it's not the most efficient way to get to people, but it is one way. I don't know if our recruiting and our process of hiring people is good. I think it's good but I'm not sure. But we want to hire lots of really smart engineers because that's how these problems get solved.  It does, absolutely. That's generally the hiring mistakes that I've made in the past, it's been, just as I said, it's been looking too much at their intellectual capability alone and not on how they affect those around them. What really matters is, for someone's contribution to a company, is how they are as an individual and how they affect others around them. You could say it's also analogous to a sports teamthe best person on the team is not necessarily the one who scores the most goals. It could be the person who assists in the most goals. If there's one person on the team who just wants the ball all the time and just wants to kick it at the goal, that can actually be detrimental. So, it is important to weigh personality and just are they going to be a good person, will people like working with them, that sort of thing. It does make a difference. Well, NASA has been really helpful to SpaceX. Not just in terms of giving us contracts but also technically in a number of areas and a lot of the things that we've done at SpaceX have been dependent on things that NASA's done in the past. I think we're certainly incredibly grateful for everything NASA's done in the past and the ongoing support that we receive from NASA. I'm a huge fan of NASA. I think NASA's actually doing the right thing given all the constraints that they have. Within the context of being this large government entity that's getting pushed in all sorts of different directions and has a lot of limitations on what it can do, I've been pretty impressed by what NASA has done given all of those constraints.Yeah, so I think it'sif NASA continues to expand upon the support of competitive commercial space that's probably what will have the most positive effect on the future of space development. Our goal for SpaceX and Tesla was not, initially, to do huge amounts of internal manufacturing. We actually tried to do as little manufacturing as possible at first but we found we had to insource more and more over time. So, it's not from the standpoint of we really believe in insourcing or outsourcing, it's just givenif there's a great supplier, then we'd love to use a great supplier, then if there's not then we need to do it ourselves. The need to find a way or make a way to a good solution, and it's just over time we've had to make our way more often than not. For rocketry, there's also ITAR limitations. Which is that rockets are considered advanced weapons technologies, so we can't just outsource it to some other country. But, I think for manufacturing, very often people think of manufacturing as just some rote process of making copies. Which, actually, it isn't. Manufacturing is building the machine that makes the machine. If you think the machine is important, well, building the machine that makes the machine is also extremely important, and more often than not, what I've found is the manufacturing is harder than the original product. For example, at Tesla we can make one of a car very easily, but to make thousands of a car with high reliability and quality and where the cost is affordable, is extremely hard. I'd say, maybe 10 times harder than just making one prototypemaybe more. At SpaceX also, maybe approaching an order of magnitude harder to manufacture rockets and launch a lot of them than to design one in the first place. So, I really think a lot more smart people should be getting into manufacturing and it's kinda fun, so it's likeit sort of got a bad name for a while but it's really interesting. Actually, if power-to-weight ratio is of interest to you, rocket turbopumps really take the cake. The turbopump on the Merlin engine generates 10,000 horsepower and weighs 150 lbs. Fuel efficiency is sort of a different question.. but power-to-weight, it's at the ragged edge of pulling those molecules apart. It's kind of amazing that you can get 10,000 horsepower out of this thing that you can basically pick up. But, for electric motors, if you have a properly designed AC induction motor getting a high power-to-weight ratio and a really great response rate, low latency and all that, extremely low ripple current and what-not, it just sort of comes naturally to an AC induction motor. The bigger challenge is actually cooling it effectively and then particularly, cooling the rotor because you've got this rotor going at 18,000 RPM. So, in the Model-S we coaxially cool the rotor in order to have high steady state. For an electric motor you can haveit's easier to get peak power for a short period of time, it's hard to have sustained peak powerbecause you overheat, and then it's hard to get high efficiency over a complicated drive cycle. Those tend to be the problems we wrestle with more than, say, the peak power. We can get peak power pretty easily but sustained power and efficiency over the drive cycle are hard. Actually, that's not why I started SpaceX, butI mean, the easiest thing for me to do would have been to buy a ride on the Soyuz and for that I would have been able to go to the space station as a number of other people have done but the thing that I was trying to get at was how to get us back on the track of extending life beyond Earth. That's the reason for starting SpaceX, and I expected it to fail, and people say, oh, well why would you even start that in the first place, but if you go to before I started SpaceX, I wanted to this philanthropic mission to send a small greenhouse to the surface of Mars and try to get the public excited about sending life to Mars, because people respond to precedents and superlatives and this would be the first life on another planet, the furtherest that life's ever traveled and I thought that that would get people excited and that would result in NASA's budget getting increased and then we could resume the dream of Apollo. My initial goal was just to try to figure out how to get NASA's budget higher, but then I came to the conclusion that if we don't make rockets way better then it won't matter. We can get a budget increase but then we'd just send one mission to Mars and then maybe never go there again. The goal of SpaceX, really, was to make as much progress as possible, to advance rocket technology to the point where hopefully we can establish a colony on Mars, or at least get as far along that way as we can. We'll just try to go as far as we can. Well.. yeah. I don't know, we're probablywe're building a ship that NASA's going to use and that other people will use. In terms of an astronaut corps, I mean, I kinda think, like, what we should be transporting are scientists and engineers. Not pilots, really. Dragon doesn't need pilots. It obviously goes there now with just cargo. We just sent up 40 mice. They were not piloting the craft. So really, it's a means of transporting people to the Earth-Moon orbit region in order to do science, basically. Potentially to the Moon to do some exploration there, but I kind of think it should be easy to go on a spacecraft. Like, you should be able to just get on with no training and go. It shouldn't be hard. Well, Boeing is a fine company of course. What we're trying to do with Dragon 2or the new crew Dragon designis be able to land propulsively with precision. Which I think is kind of the next generation. If you consider the first generation was parachutes to a water landing then wings and gear landing on a runway, the third generation is propulsive landing with precision. If you saw a movie about the future with aliens landing, how do they land? Like that. Okay? Obviously it'd be kind of weird if the aliens landed in the ocean with parachutes, we'd be like okay, nothing to fear. Boeing's design is like slightly improved because it's got airbags but it's still and imprecise landing somewhere in a huge expansive desert and it's basically landing on airbags and crashing in the desert. Okay, that's one way to land. I think the future has to be precise propulsive landing because that's what you need to go to the Moon or to Mars or anywhere else in the solar system and that's the thing we should be focusing on. We're already going to the space station and back, by the way, Boeing isn't doing that.  Well, a lot of things that are envisioned in sci-fi, books, it's a wide range of course, a lot of things that are envisioned do make sense and like I said, there isn't some other way to land on the Moon. You can't land on the Moon with parachutes and airbags. Due to the lack of atmosphere over there. I don't know. I think it'sI'm hopeful there will be multiple colonies on Mars. There's certainlyfrom a SpaceX standpoint, we don't mean to do anything on an exclusionary basis, we're just trying to get there. We'd love to have that debate. Oh, is it too American? Okay, maybe, but we've got the base on Mars, who cares. But, I think, if there was an American base on Mars it would certainly prompt other countries to want to establish their own base on Mars too, but I do think it would be better to have competition than cooperation. Yes, I think we'd be better off with competition rather than insistinglike, in the space station we got the international space station but when governments are all forced to go in lockstep, it tends to not make things go faster. We want some sort of positive competitive element, I think. So, we don't want people going to war of anything, just some positive competitive element like the Olympics. If people compete hard and it's good sportsmanship and everything, then the net result is better than if like if there was no competition. Olympics with no competition wouldn't make any sense. So, I think some positive competitive thing would be better and we should definitely not insist that all countries go at the same pace or some collection of countries go at the same pace, that would slow things down dramatically and maybe not even happen.  Yeah, ESA, Chinese space agency, everyone, yeah. Well, I think any natural resource extraction on Mars would bethe output would be for Mars. It definitely wouldn't make sense to transport Mars stuff 200 million miles back to Earth. Honestly, if you had like crack-cocaine on Mars, in like prepackaged pallets, it still wouldn't make sense to transport it back here. It's be good times for the Martians, but not back here. Resources would be for a colony to use. The beamed energy thing is interesting. I think it is a worthy area of research. I think it's worth trying to make something work. Try to get something to orbit or a really high delta-velocity with beamed energy and see how well does it work in practice. I do think there'sI mean, I'll state some concerns but these concerns are not meant to say that we shouldn't work on them. I'll preface it by saying we should work on it. I think there are some scaling challenges with beamed energy. If you say, what's the actual power output you need to send, say, a Falcon 9 class vehicle to orbit, and it's a very very big number. You start needing like, woah, we need like the power of like the eastern seaboard, ya know, to sort of send something Falconcall it Falcon Heavy class, what do you need to send something like that to orbit, it's really a huge amount of energy, or a huge amount of power, to be precise. Actually, the power level you need is enormous. You don't need, maybe not that much on an energy basis, but you can't just tell everyone to turn their lights off in Florida. So then you need like a huge power plant or a huge capacitor bank or a huge high power density battery array. So, I'd like to see how well does it scale, and then you say, what's the cost of the huge power plant and the huge laser array, and that sort of thing and how does that compare to the cost per unit mass if you just carry your own oxygen with you and have a lower ISP and don't do any of those things. That's cool. What was the ratio of the pod to tube diameter? Right, but, the pod diameter to tube diameter?  Ahh, that's the problem. So, you actually want the pod toyou want a sort of ratio of the pod area to thetube cross-section to pod cross-section of about two. So, like, the pod is only half the cross-sectional area of the tube, because you're still going to want to have some flow of air over the pod. Yeah, you'll probably deal with the Canterus limit by having a compressor on the node but it only partly addresses it and then the rest is airflow around the pod. You definitely don't want to have something that's really a tight fit because you also start hitting tolerance limitations like that. Yeah, and you just need some play in that system. A tricky thing also for if you're going really fast is just even small imperfections in the surface of the tube which I think can be deal with by essentially havingonce the tube's done you actually need to run something that's going to smooth it out. You basically need to run a grinder through the tube that's going to polish the surface and make sure that there are not undulations. In the proposal of the Hyperloop we had the air-skis were sprung. Yeah, that's also important.  You actually have to allow expansion at the terminals. Where-ever the terminals are, you have to have that length of expansion and then in the pylons that are supporting it, you actually need to allow each pylon to stretch in x. So, it'syou can't hard constraint it at the pylons.Yeah, I could probably do 10 or 15 more minutes. We’re not really going to try to get resources on the Moon, because that’d be useful if you’re on the Moon but not for bringing it back to Earth. So, if there’s a Moon base, I’d expect they’d extract resources, but for themselves. I’m going to try to get through a bunch of questions, so I’ll make my answers short. I think we should be very careful about artificial intelligence. If I were to guess at what our biggest existential threat is, it’s probably that. So, we need to be very careful with artificial intelligence. I’m increasingly inclined to think that there should be some regulatory oversight maybe at the national and international level, just to make sure that we don’t do something very foolish. “With artificial intelligence we are summoning the demon.” You know all those stories where the guy with the pentagram and the holy water is sure that he can control the demon, didn’t work out. HAL9000 would be easy, it’s way more complex thanI mean, it’d put HAL9000 to shame, yeah, like a puppy dog. Sorry, could you repeat the question? I was just sort of thinking about the AI thing for a second more.  Communications is certainly very important. We’re going to need tera-bit level communications between Earth and Mars which necessarily means that you’re going to want a tight beam, like a laser communication system or something like that, and relayssort of satellites that relay itbecause sometimes Mars is on the other side of the Sun, so you gotta bounce the photons around the Sun, not through it, and yeah, so I think communications are going to definitely be important. I also see that, on Earth, there’s a lot of potential for space-based communications. I think that there’s a huge amount of room for growth for having satellite communications systems that provide high bandwidth global coverage, and we’ll need the same for Mars. Haha, I say bravo. I mean, I thought it would be awesome if there was a space elevator. I wouldn’t hold my breath. I mean, I don’t think it’s realistic but I’d love to be proven wrong. I always think of, like, Charlie and The Chocolate Factory when I hear the space elevator, ya know, because people sort of imagine it’s like an elevator, you press up and now you’re in space. This is extremely complicated. I don’t think it’s really realistic to have a space elevator. Put it this way, at the point at which we have a bridge from LA to Tokyo, which I think is a much easier problem, thenya know, how about across the Atlantic, some sort of 2000 mile long bridge, or 3000 mile long bridge, something like that would be made of carbon nanotubes. I don’t think we’ve got a carbon nanotube footbridge so far, let alone some enormous 60,000 mile long space elevator. Anyway, I think it’sit’s not the thing that I think makes sense right now but if somebody can prove me wrong that’d be great. Well, the illustrations that I’ve seen basically has them using a bunch of SpaceX rockets and Dragon spacecraft. I’m like, okay, if they want to buy a bunch of Dragons and Falcon 9 rockets, that’s cool. We’ll certainly sell them. I mean, I don’t think they’ve got anywhere near the funding to buy even one, so I think therefore it’s unrealistic, and I think trying to go to Mars in Dragon is less than ideal. It’s at leastwell, if you go real fast it’s maybe a three month journey and normally it would be more like a 6 to 8 month journey. That’s a long time to spend in something with the interior volume of an SUV. I’d recommend waiting for the next generation of technology. Well, ya know, I think it would not work. It would just be an illustration on a page that doesn’t have real hardware. That would be the difference. I just don’t think space elevators are like a very sensible thing, ya know. Yeah, absolutely. What we’re planning to do over time is go to 100% renewable power generation for our Supercharge stations. We’ve sort of temporally not added solar power, because in the interests of just having national and international coverage, so you can drive anywhere in the US, Europe or Asia using Superchargers, we haven’t constrained that so that every Supercharger has to have solar panels. There are a few that have solar panels, most don’t. But in the long term all of them will either have solar panels or otherwise get their power from renewable sources, and in the long term I expect it to be solar panels to a stationary battery pack, so that the solar panels can charge the stationary battery pack over the course of the week and then that stationary battery pack and buffer the energy and release it during peak times. What we see with Superchargers is huge differences in usage. You can imagine, when people go away for the weekend, like Friday nights and Saturday nightsFriday nights and Sunday nights, huge peak usage. People are going somewhere, like a family trip for the weekend, but say, Wednesday at 11am, low usage. So, you want to have a stationary battery pack, solar panels and then it could work even if the power grid goes down. That’d be cool I think, to have something like even post-apocalypse you can still drive around. Well, I think, given that we open sourced our patents earlier this year, I think we’reya know  I think that suggests that we’re trying to be helpful. If there’s anything that Tesla can do that’s helpful and doesn’t distract us from making cars, then we’re happy to do that. We’ve also done battery packs and power trains for Mercedes and for Toyota. Right now, the fundamental constraint is on battery production. So, we have to solve that constraint in order for there to be any scaling up of electric cars and that’s why we’ve got the Gigafactory, and things have to be affordable. “Basically, people need a compelling and affordable electric vehicle. That is the holy grail, and we’re trying to get there as fast as we can.” Yeah sure. I mean, I love technology and particular when I was a kid I would just consume all the science fiction and fantasy, movies, books, anything at all. Even if it was just really shonky. In terms of key influences, I certainly liked Star Trek because that actually shows more of a Utopian future. It’s not like things are horrible in the futurethere’s so many bloody post-apocalyptic futures, okay, can we have one that’s nice? Just a few. So I like that about Star Trek. In terms of some key books and movies, obviously Star Wars“Star Wars was the first movie I ever saw, so it was going to be fairly influential.” I’d never seen a movie in a theater before, it was like super great. In terms of books, Lord Of The Rings is probably my favorite book, but it’s not really sci-fi, in fact oddly enough J.R. Tolkien is almost anti-technology. It’s funny. Lord Of The Rings was a book but it’s kind of anti-technology but it’s still great. I think the Foundation series from Asimov is like one of the best ever, and the books of Arthur C. Clarke and Heinlein, those are like probably the three best sci-fi authors. Recently someone was recommending to me the Ian Banks novels as being fairly good. Yeah, what do you think is good?  Yeah, it’s funny you should mention that. I think that’s Heinlein’s best book, honestly. Haha. Well, I don’t think thatwell, our behavior is justwe’re just going to keep trying to make rocket technology better and better. I mean, I think the time frame for the SLS sending people to Mars is pretty far out thereand if it does that’s great, but it’s reallywhat we need is a technology system that’s capable of sending large numbers of people and cargo to Mars. It’s cool to send one mission, sure, but that’s not the thing that changes humanity’s future. The thing that really matters is being able to establish a self-sustaining civilization on Mars, and for that I don’t see anything being done except SpaceX, honestly. That’s not to say SpaceX will be successful but I don’t see anyone even trying.Thank you.We're making -- we're gonna make a big investment in Germany. In fact, right now, Germany is our top focus in the world. I'll tell you why -- the reason is that this is a big and important market for us. In fact for Tesla Roadster, this was the second-biggest market in the world after the US, and Germany is obviously a place that appreciates engineering and appreciates great automotive engineering in particular, and I feel like, if we can't do well in Germany, that's not a good sign. So it's very important that we do well here. For a very discerning buying public that's used to looking at the best in the world, we definitely have to do everything that's needed to succeed. So, I actually think it's going to be long-term for us. The third-largest market in the world after China, and one of the highest in per capita sales as well. It's also a country obviously where you can go quite fast, which is really cool. In fact I was just driving the Model S on the Autobahn, in one of the unrestricted sections, and it's a lot of fun.There are a few things that I said I was going to announce. One is that for any buyers of the Model S, we're going to offer a free, optional, high-speed tuning. So whether you bought the car, or will buy the car in the future, if you're someone who likes to ride at the top-speed on the Autobahn, we will do a custom tune of the car to make it feel really great at top-speed. You know, most other parts of the world, driving at over 200 kilometers an hour, you don't have to worry too much about that in most parts of the world. I can tell you that in LA, it's difficult to get above 50 kilometers per hour. But here, it's important, so we want to make sure we take care of that. And we're actually going to send my top engineering team over here to tune it just right for the German road. As I said, this will apply to new cars purchased in the future and will be done for free as a retrofit to existing cars.The next big thing is that we're making a huge investment in Superchargers ... my team to accelerate the Supercharger deployment as much as possible. So, Germany is actually going to have the second-highest number of Superchargers anywhere outside of the US, and in fact more Superchargers per capita than the U.S. And in fact this is going to happen very rapidly, in fact we're breaking ground right now on the first six Superchargers. And then we're going to rapidly ramp that up to the point where every quarter we'll probably going to double the number of Superchargers all the way through the end of next year. So our goal is by the end of the first quarter, by March of next year, that more than half of the German population is within range of a Supercharger, and that by the end of next year, it's 100%. I'm not sure of the exact number, it's probably on the order of 40 to 50. Something like that. We want the Superchargers not to just be at the max distance but to be maybe at around 200-kilometer spacing, something like that, so it's convenient, you don't always have to stop at the same place.  Yes, this is indeed part of reason, is that when you go really fast, you need the Superchargers, but more often.And there's also going to be a power upgrade to the Superchargers, so they'll be at the 135-kilowatt level versus 120-kilowatts in the U.S. And I think there's potential for upgrades beyond that that will take it even further. So the goal with the Supercharger is that when you stop alongside the highway -- and these will be at places where you'd normally stop on a trip, to get fuel, get a bite to eat, or get a snack -- there will be a bunch of locations where you can park your car, plug it in, and then get a bite to eat, hit the restroom, grab a coffee, be on your way, and your car is charged and ready to go. So you can be in and out in twenty, twenty-five minutes, type of thing. Well it depends on how fast you go. The faster you go, the drag force increases with the square of speed, you lose range quite fast at the very high speeds. But that's true of any car, true of a gasoline car, or anything.  Yes, 200 kilometers should be no problem.There will also be a navigation upgrade that is coming out over-the-air, probably in December, that will calculate least time to destination. Including taking into account the Supercharger locations. So if you want to get to the destination fastest, it’s gonna figure out how fast you should drive, how long you should stop, and navigate you to the Supercharger stations along the way, and then to your ultimate destination, and will calculate the whole route with the least time possible. And it’s even going to do things like look up the wind speed on the Internet, and factor that into range. Take into account elevation, wind speed, etc. so it should be very accurate. So that’s the big Supercharger investment.Also a big Service Center investment. We’re going to be expanding our Service Center coverage dramatically, in fact even in the next few months, but certainly by the end of next year. By the end of next year, we expect to have probably 80% of Germany within about 100 kilometers of a Tesla Service Station. It’s a big investment, and we’re going to be hiring a lot of people. And if you know anyone you think would be great to add to the Tesla team, please ask them to submit their information. We’re looking for great people — fast-growing company, lots of opportunity — and it’s a fun work environment and also some other good things.Those are the three main things that I wanted to announce. And there will be a press release with more detail, that goes out on Thursday morning, that will be spelling out where some of the initial locations will be, and giving maps. But I wanted to tell you guys first ahead of the press. Because really people like yourselves are extremely important to the future of Tesla. We don’t have the budget to spend money on advertising, so the only way we’re able to grow is by good word of mouth. So to the degree that people that really believe in sustainability, that really believe in the electric car revolution, people like yourselves are very important to the success of Tesla and to the success of electric vehicles in general. There are many people out there that don’t believe in electric cars, they thing nothing is going to happen. We have to overcome that negativity, otherwise it’s going to be way too slow, and there will be tremendous damage to the environment as a result. So word of mouth is super important, it’s vital. And we need you to be able to go out there, and talk to people that you know and say ‘Hey, electric cars are ready.’ It’s time to make it happen. And if the big car companies see that our sales are good, and that we are actually able to take a little bit of market share — I mean, we’re a tiny company, so a drop in the bucket — but if they see that people are buying these cars, then they will have no choice but to conclude that electric cars are the right way to go, and that will accelerate the transition to sustainable transport.So every time the Model S is driving down the road and somebody sees it, or a friend gets in and you take them for a ride, and their eyes open wide, and they’re like ‘Whoa, this is for real, it’s not like I read in the papers’  Exactly — it’s a very important thing. There are lots of naysayers out there, lots of people that say ‘electric cars are never gonna happen, we should just be resigned to burning hydrocarbons forever’ — well not forever, until they run out of course — and then they’ll say certain technologies like fuel cells — and it’s like, ah God, fuel cells are so bullshit, it’s really rubbish. The only reason they do fuel cells is because, they aren’t really believers, it’s like a marketing thing. But reality is that, you take a fuel cell vehicle, and you take the best-case of the fuel cell vehicle in terms of the mass and volume required to go a particular range, as well as the cost of the fuel cell system and — if you took best-case of that, it doesn’t even equal the current state-of-the-art in lithium-ion batteries, so there’s no way for it to be a workable technology. And then, putting up a huge hydrogen distribution structure is also extremely difficult. And hydrogen is quite a dangerous gas. You know, it’s suitable for the upper stage of rockets, but not for cars.  Yeah, exactly. Did you see ‘Revenge of the Electric Car’? So it’s really important that we work as fast as possible to accelerate sustainable transport, the sooner it happens, the less environmental damage that will occur, and the world will be in a far better situation. So that’s what we’re trying do at Tesla, that’s really the goal, that’s why we put so much time and effort into trying to grow the company. I can also say that every time somebody buys a Model S, they are helping to pay for the mass-market lower-cost car in the future. Every bit of money that we make — we don’t issue dividends, we don’t have high salaries — my salary is one dollar a year — I spend it well — I do have shares, but I don’t sell them. Yeah, captains should go down with the ship, hopefully it’s — wait a second — the captain should be the last one to comfortably exit the ship. Sure. I wrote a blog piece, which might be worth doing a translation and sending it out. It gave us an opportunity to explain that in fact an electric car, or at least our electric car, is five times less likely to catch fire than a gasoline car. In this particular accident — it was a very peculiar accident, where the guy drove over a piece that fell off of a truck, it was a big curved piece of a fender, it went under the car and then jackknifed up into the battery pack with a huge impact. Nonetheless he was able to drive the car off of the highway and get out, he wasn’t injured at all. And just the front portion of the battery pack caught fire. The net result is, he’s fine. If it would have been a gasoline car, he could have easily been killed, just because the force of that impact would have potentially gone into the passenger compartment and hurt somebody. So the objective statistics right now are that the Model S is about five times less likely to catch fire than any gasoline far. So a typical gasoline car has one fire every 20 million miles, and our car has, so far, is averaging one fire every 100 million miles.  Thank you for bringing up this good point. The Model S was tested by the U.S. government where it got 5 stars in every category  Yeah, technically. And — the official score was 5 stars in every category, but in reality it was more like 5.4. But there is a statistical measure that they provide to all manufacturer, it’s usually too technical for public consumption, so they just provide it to manufacturers But it’s called the statistical probability of likelihood of injury, and it was the lowest probability of injury of any car ever tested by the U.S. government. Great — was that on a single charge?  I don’t know if everybody heard that, this gentleman drove all the way from Slovenia, at an average of 100 kilometers per hour, and drove 450 kilometers on a single charge, without recharging.  Wow, thanks We were able to hit the ship, which it looks like with all the simulations that if we had not run short of hydraulic fluid about a minute before landing that we would have actually landed. With the next flight we have 50% more hydraulic fluid margin. Something else could go wrong, certainly, but at least with respect to that, it should cover. So there's a real decent chance, within three weeks, of landing it. No, I was actually at mission control, which is here, but if it had landed I would have flown out to Florida to see it come to port. I was there for the attempt a week ago, at Cape Canaveral, but I couldn't get out there this time around.  Yeah, that'd be really great. Yeah, it's a really big deal. For all modes of transport, there's a night and day difference if they're reusable or not. You can imagine, if aircraft were single use nobody would fly, or there would be a handful of missions for scientific and military purposes but that's about it. A 747 is $250 million, you'd need two of them for a round trip but nobody's paying half a million dollars to fly to London and back. For our rocket, which isit costs about $60 million, which is actuallyit's the lowest cost rocket in the world, despite not being reusable, or at the start not flying as reusable. Still $60 million is a lot, but if we could do a thousand flights, it comes from a $60 million capital cost to a $60,000 capital cost. Aircraft do tens of thousands of flights, so if we can just do an order of magnitude fewer flights conceivably than an aircraft can do, it's a giant giant difference. The cost of the fuel and oxidizer and all that is comparable to that of an aircraft. The fuel that we use is sort of a purified form of jet fuel. Jet fuel is a sort of kerosene. Because of our purity requirements the cost per gallon is about twice that of jet fuel, but that's all. So, instead of us paying, say, $2 or 3 per gallon, we pay $5 or 6 a gallon for the fuel. Basically it's a few hundred thousandtwo to three hundred thousand dollars per flight in fuel and oxygen, per mission, vs a $60 million rocket. A pretty giant difference. Yeah, actually, we'veNASA's certainly been a key customer of ours for a few years. The first five years or six years of the company, nobody would talk to us on the government side, NASA or the military, and we got a few sort of fringe customers on the commercial side, that was it. We didn't have any government anything for the first half decade. Then NASA nibbled a little bit and we were able to get a small contract, then we were able to get a much larger contract, and now NASA is a pretty significant supporter. They're about a quarter of our missions, are NASA. They're like our, I mean, they're our anchor customer. Our biggest single customer. The commercial missions are collectively more than NASA. On the military side we've not yet been able towe've not yet been allowed to compete for the primary military contract because Boeing and Lockheed have managed to shut down all competition, but we're close. I think we're getting close. Yeah. Well, people have tried but usually the military industrial complex is able to resist any attack by a newcomer. It's like fighting this giant citadel with very high walls, and usually if a small force attacks a large citadel it is not the citadel that falls.  Well, there's this whole certification process that we've gone through, which iswe're being held to a much higher standard than Boeing and Lockheed were when they actually did their competition. But still, the excuses get harder and harder and thus far all the Falcon 9 missions have been successful, in the ascent phase, so.. the federal law requires competition, it's fundamental, so they can stave off competition for a long time and they have been able to do that, but they won't be able to do it forever, unless we mess up. We have a lot of support in Congress. Initially things likethe people fighting it are in the bureaucracy of the Pentagon and the procurement officers who then go work at Boeing and Lockheed or their prime contractors, which is actually what happened. It's easy to understand from a game theory standpoint because essentially we're asking them to award the contract to a company where they're probably not going to get a job, against the company where their friends are. So they've gotta go against their friends and their future retirement program. This is a difficult thing to expect. Yeah, we have all bipartisan in Congress which is pretty great because the lobbying power of Boeing and Lockheed is particularly wide, it’s really huge.  Yeah. If this were just a matter of lobbying power we would have no chance. I’m not sure what the combined Boeing and Lockheed lobbying forces are, but if they were to send them all out at once the sky is dark. I mean, it’s a swarm. They have entire buildingsyou can see it as you go into DC with all, ya know. We’ve got half of one floor. So it has required a lot of effort from me and from other people at SpaceX and it’s just to find people in Congress who are ideologically motivated and who aren’t swayed by lobbying or only perhaps a little bit swayed. “Ya know, John McCain spent a lot of time in a prisoner of war campone would think he’s not easily intimidated.” He’s reallyhe thinks this is a crazy issue because here we have the taxpayers paying three times more for a rocket. I mean, Boeing and Lockheed make decent rockets but three times more is really crazy, and then the main engine is Russian and the engine maker is majority owned by the Kremlin, directly, there’s not even a fig leaf between. So, why are we sending hundreds of millions of taxpayer money to fund the Russian war machine? In the interests of national security, we’re sending hundreds of millions of dollars to a country that is doing terrible things and certainly not acting in our best interests. This makes no sense, it’s like a Joseph Heller novel. Ya know, it’s so crazy. There’s some discussions underway, I think this week and next in DC, so we’ll see how it goes. The justice department is the one defending the defense department. They shouldn’t be defending the defense department, this is crazy, they should care about justice. “In fact, at one point the judge actually had to remind the justice department lawyer that he works for the American people, not Boeing and Lockheed.” Yeah, it’s not making any sense.  I think just taking a look at the missions that were awarded without any competition and saying which of those should be open to competition. That doesn’t mean that SpaceX will win, that simply means that we will have an opportunity to compete. This is sort of like where the true absurdity comes in, which missions should no company have an opportunity to compete? Well, the law says, actually all the missions should be subject to competition and there may be some that we’re unable to do or our track record is not sufficient or some reason that we can’t complete it, but that would cause us to fall out of the competition. The crazy thing is not having a competition at all. In terms of what would make us happy, I don’t know, some increase.. at least a few missions that are taken out of the not-competed and put into the let’s-compete-them category. I mean, let us compete and lose, that’s fine. We’re hopeful, but I honestly don’t know what to expect. It’s difficult to say. It’s a complement of course, I suppose, if all of our competitors are ganging up against us. Certainly I think there’s some strange bedfellows there.  I believe they’re pretty different. Blue Origin is kind of a startup, small high tech culture vs the staid big aerospace companies. That they had Blue Origin, sort of come out of the blue. I mean, I would be surprised ifI don’t think Blue Origin understands just how stringent the defense department requirements are for an engine. They’re really pretty intense. They’re in for a surprise on that front. Frankly, I don’t mind. I think that companies should just get together and compete as best they can. Totally cool, just let it be a fair game. That all, have a fair game, level playing field, may the best company or group of companies win. That ultimately serves the best interests of, in this case, the taxpayer. Yes, absolutely. They get huge sums of money and it’s extremely difficult to compete, but essentially ULA has decided that they’re afraid even of an unfair competition. “They don’t want a fair competition. They don’t even want an unfair competition. They want no competition at all.”  Yeah, I guess, they’re afraid that we’ll take some of the huge gravy train they have exclusive access to, or that it’s not going to be as big. The truth is they’ll still be the primary supplier for a long time. We’re just talking about taking some portion of that, and I think, even in the very long term, the defense department is likely to want to retain two companies. They’re not going to want to have a single rocket family. With ULA they have the Atlas and the Delta rocket families. It used to be Boeing and Lockheed competing and thenI don’t know if you know the back storybut there was all sorts of shenanigans andlike, Boeing stole thousands of documents from Lockheed and used those in their competition against Lockheed and Lockheed found out. I mean, these guys have a pretty bad track records here of really bad behavior. Like, the Boeing CFO went to jail for bribing the top Air Force procurement officer and they had been doing so for years. I don’t know if you know the Darleen Druyun situation. “So, it’s not paranoia or made up, people did time in the big house. You can pretty much bet that’s the tip of the iceberg.” The Air Force did a thorough investigation and concluded that was the only oneit was only her. Yeah, we certainly have people from the Air Force and from Lockheed and Boeing. About a third of the company comes from the traditional aerospace industry.  We’re just over 4000. We were quite a bit less in previous years. We are. That’s actually what we’re going to announce on Friday. It’s been floating around.. We’re creating an engineering center in Seattle. It’s actually a satellite office creating satellites. We’ll have a soft opening and then we’ll have the big announcement on Friday. “We’re going to try to do for satellites what we’ve done for rockets.” See if we can make similar improvements in the satellite arena.  It’s going to be fairly significant. Ultimately several hundred people, maybe a thousand people. So, it’s big. At the start maybe up to 60 people.  Maybe three or four years.  Yeah, exactly.  and also people from Boeing and others, so we expectit’ll primarily be satellites but we’ll alsoif there’s really excellent people who want to work on rockets but for family reasons or just refuses to live in L.A.a lot of people refuse to live in L.A., then they can work at the Seattle office. Yeah, we might join them. Most satellites are really quite primitive. You kinda think that satellite technology would be really advanced but if you look at how the big satellites are done, all the geostationary stuff, they really want something that’s flight proven or that’s space proven. So, if you start your design process saying you want proven technology, it’s not going to be new technology. So then you design it with, essentially old technology, it takes a while to build that design and then you’ve got to go launch the design and so by the time the satellites is actually launched they’re typically really outdated technologylike 5 to 10 years oldand then if we’re talking about a geostationary satellite that’s up there for 15 years, by the end of its life it’s a quarter of a century old technology. In terms of electronics it’s super-ancient stuff. But people, because they go with the Battlestar Gallactica strategy of packing everything into one giant satellite they’re petrified that if anything goes wrong their whole business could collapse, you end up with old technology. If you instead go with smaller satellites that you launch more frequently you can use present day technology, or even cutting edge stuff that isn’t even necessarily in the hands of consumers, take a chance on the satellite not working but since we’re launching frequently and testing it out frequently we can verify that it’s going to work in space and actually have technology that’s a decade or sometimes two decades more advanced.I’ll try to make this as interesting as possible. If you like space, you’ll like this talk. My background in brief, I’ll talk a little bit Zip2 and Paypal and then mostly about space and what we’re doing in space. So, I originally came up California to do energy physics at Stanford, actually. And ended up putting it in ’95. And ended up putting that on hold to start Zip2. I’ll tell you a little about the four process of exactly what happened there. In ’95, it wasn’t at all clear that the internet was going to be a big commercial thing. In fact, most of the venture capitalists that I talked to hadn’t even heard of the internet which sounds bizarre on Sand Hill Road. But I wanted to do something in there. I though it would be a pretty huge thing. I though it was one of those things that came along once in a very long while. So, I got a deferment at Stanford. And thought I’d give it a couple of quarters. If it didn’t workout, which I though it probably wouldn’t, then I’d come back at this school. Actually, I talked to my professor. I told him this and he said, well, I don’t think you’d be coming back, and that was the last conversation I had with him. The only way to get involved in the internet in ’95, that I could think of, was to start a company. Because there weren’t a lot of companies to go and work for, apart from Netscape, maybe one or two others. And I don’t have any money. So I though we got to make something that’s going to return money very, very quickly. So we thought that the media industry would need help converting its content from a print media to electronic. And they clearly have money. So if we could find a way to help them root their media to the internet that would be an obvious way of generating revenue. There was no advertising revenue on the internet at the time. That was really the basis of Zip2. We ended up pulling quite a bit of software for the media industry; primarily, the print media industry. So we had these investors and customers; Hearst Corporation, Knight Ridder, most of the major US print publishers. We brought that up and then we had the opportunity to sell to Compaq in early ’99. And basically, took that off for a little over $300 million dollars in cash. That’s the currency I highly recommend.So we had that but I wanted to do something more after Zip2. Immediately post the sale, I’d ordinarily take the time off. I tried to get where the opportunities, this is early ’99, remained in the internet. It seemed to me that there hadn’t been a lot of innovation in the financial services sector. And when you think about it, money is low bandwidth. You don’t need some sort of big infrastructure improvement to do things with it. It’s really just an entry in the database. The paper form of money is really only a small percentage of all the money that’s out there. It should land itself to innovation on the internet. So, we thought of a couple of different things we could do. One of the things was to combine all of somebody’s financial services needs into one website. So, you can have banking, brokerage, insurance and all sorts of things in one place. And that was actually quite a difficult problem to solve. But we solved most of the issues associated with that. Then we had a little feature which took us about a day. That was about an emailed money from one customer to another. You could type in an email address or, actually, any unique identifier and transfer funds or conceivably stocks or mutual funds or whatever from one account holder to another. And if you should try to transfer money to somebody who didn’t have an account in the system, it would then forward an email to them saying, hey, why don’t you sign up and open an account? Whenever we demonstrate these two sets of features we’d say, this is a feature that took us a lot of effort to do and look how you can see your bank statement and your mutual funds and insurance and all that. It’s all in one page and look how convenient that is. And people would go, hmm, and we would say, and by the way, we have this feature where you can enter somebody’s email address and transfer his funds, and they go, wow All right, OK. So we focused the company’s business on emailed payments. In the early game going, our company’s called X.com. There was another company called Confinity which also started out from a different area. They started off with Palm Pilot cryptography and they had as a demo application the ability to beam token payments from one Palm Pilot to another by the infrared port. Then they had a website which was called Paypal where you’d reconcile the beamed payments. And what they found was that the website portion was actually far more interesting to people than Palm Pilot cryptography was. So they started leaning their business in that direction. In early 2000, X.com acquired Confinity and then about a year later, In early 2000, X.com.And that’s just an approximate evolution of the company. But Paypal is really a perfect case example of viral marketing like Hotmail was. Where one customer would essential act as a sales person for you by bringing in other customers. So they would send money to a friend and, essentially, recruit that friend into the network. So you had this exponential growth. The more customers you had the faster it grew. It was like bacteria in a Petri dish, it just goes like this S-curve. I ran Paypal for about the first two years of its existence. We launched after year one and by the end of year two, we had a million customers. It gives you a sense of how fast things grow in that scenario. And we didn’t have a sales force. We, actually, didn’t have a VP of Sales. We didn’t have a VP of Marketing. And we didn’t spend any money on advertising.In about February of last year, I’m sure you’re probably following it, Paypal went public. I think we were the only internet company to go public in the first part of last year. It went off reasonably well. Although, I think we had more SEC rewrites than any company I can imagine. I think we set a record on SEC rewrites. This was right around the end-on time when there was all sorts of corporate scandals. So, they put as through the ringer. Shortly thereafter, about June, July, we struck a deal with eBay, to sell the company to eBay for over $4 billion. But that was when eBay’s stock price was about $55 and they hadn’t split. So, I guess, in today’s dollars we were about $3 billion. So it worked out pretty well.It happened coincidentally, that in the first part of last year I’ve been doing just some background research on space. Well, let me talk a bit about that. Essentially, I was trying to figure out why we had not made more progress since Apollo. In the ’60’s we went in from basically nothing. Nothing ever put anyone into space to putting people on the moon. Developing all the technology from scratch to do that. And yet in the ’70’s and ’80’s and the ’90’s we kind of gone side ways. We’re currently in a situation where we can’t even put a person into lower earth orbit. That doesn’t really gel with all of the other technology sectors out there. The computer that you could have bought in the early ’70’s would have filled this room and had less computing power than your cell phone. And so just about every sector of technology has improved. Why has this not improved? So I started looking into that. Initially I thought, well, perhaps, it’s a question of funding. And that funding can be garnered by really marshalling public support. So one way to get the public excited about space would be to do, maybe, a privately-funded robotic space mission to Mars. So we figured out a mission that would cost about $15 or $20 million which isn’t a lot of money but it’s about a 10th of what a low-cost NASA mission would be. The idea was called Mars Oasis. Where we’d put a small robotic land rover on the surface of Mars with seeds and dehydrated nutrient gel. They would hydrate upon landing and you’d have plants growing in a Martian radiation, gravity conditions. And you’d also be maintaining, essentially, life support systems on the surface of Mars. And this should be interesting to the public because they tend to respond to presidents and superlatives. This would be the furthest that life has ever traveled and the first life on Mars. So pretty significant. Then when I started looking at launch vehicles; the lowest cost vehicles in US is Boeing’s Delta 2 which costs about $50 million. And that’s a bit steep for what we’re trying to do. So I made three visits to Moscow, to Russia to look at buying a a Russian launch. It’s actually pretty interesting going to Moscow to negotiate for a refurbished ICBM. You know, on the range of interesting experiences that’s pretty far out there. But we actually did get to a deal. But there were so many complications associated with the deal that I wasn’t comfortable with the risk associated with it. So when I got back from the third trip, I thought, well, why is it the Russians can build these low cost launch vehicles? Because it’s not like we drive Russian cars, fly Russian planes or have Russian kitchen appliances. When was the last time we bought something Russian which wasn’t vodka? I think the US is a pretty competitive place and we should be able to build a cost efficient launch vehicle. So I put together a feasibility study which consisted of engineers that have been involved with all major launch vehicle developments over the last three decades. We iterated over a number of Saturdays beginning of last year to figure out what would be the smartest way to approach this problem of not just launch cost but also launch reliability. And we came up with a default design. And that actually was fortunate timing. That feasibility study finished up right around the time that we agreed to sell Paypal to Ebay. So coincident with that sale, I moved down to LA where there’s, actually, the biggest concentration of aerospace industry in the world. It’s actually the biggest industry in southern California and much bigger than entertainment and anything else. I was living in Palo Alto for about nine years before that.Anyway, so I’ll just talk broadly about space and where things are today. Obviously, U.S. government manned exploration is not in a great place. The three remaining shuttles are grounded. It looks like first flight might only be a year from now, if that. And we’ve got a vehicle that is incredibly expensive and really quite dangerous. For reasons mentioned there, it’s got a side-mounted crew compartment, so if there’s an explosion, that’s basically instant death. You’ve got solid rocket boosters, which, once you ignite them you can’t turn them off. And there’s something fundamentally dangerous by pre-mixing your fuel and oxidizer, I think. And then you’ve got wings and control surfaces. When you re-enter, you’ve got to maintain a precise angle at attack. Even a momentary variance in that can break the whole vehicle apart. And then, of course, you’ve got no escape system, so if anything does go wrong, you’re toast. And then you’ve got a cost that is really pretty hard to fathom. The shuttle program, when you add up all the pieces, is about $4 billion a year. And so you can divide $4 billion by the number of flights and that will tell you what the cost is. And if there’s, say, four flights a year, which there haven’t been for a while, then you’re talking about $1 billion of flight. The plans in the immediate future, we’ve got to continue building the space station. So we’re going to keep flying the shuttle, but I think it’s probably going to be the minimum number of shuttle flights that we need to launch. The long-term plans are the Orbital Space Plane. I say ‘plane’ in quotes because one of the options is a capsule, so it should be called maybe orbital space thing. But the basic idea is to have something that’s hopefully a little cheaper and a lot safer than the space shuttle. So in particular it’s going to have an escape system. So if something does go wrong you can abort to safety. The downside is that it’s still—while it might be a little cheaper, it’s still going to be pretty darn expensive. The estimated cost per flight of Orbital Space Plane is somewhere in the region of $300 to $400 million a flight. And of that amount, just $200 million alone goes to Boeing for the Delta 4-Heavy expendable booster. It’s a $15-billion development effort and expected to be completed in nine or 10 years. Now typically, things have not been under budget and under time, so it’s unlikely, I think, given historical precedent that it will stay within $15 billion end of 2012 timeline. And a bit about what’s going on elsewhere in the world. In Russia, the Soyuz is our only access to space station. It’s considerably cheaper, considerably safer. The Soyuz has a very good track record. The crew is top-mounted. It has an escape system. There are no wings or control surfaces to go wrong. Overall, it’s a pretty good system. And the estimated cost is about $60 million of flight, which is an order of magnitude less than the space shuttle. The thing that constrains them obviously is the weakness of the Russian economy. It’s very hard for them to embark on ambitious programs with an economy the size of Belgium. So China is probably the most interesting thing that’s going on in space. This month, China is expected to launch their first person into space. It will make them only the third country ever to put someone in orbit. And they’ve put a lot of money and effort into this program. If anything serves as a spur for human space exploration, it is likely to be China’s ambitions in space, and hopefully a sense in America that we want to at least keep up with China. And they have grand ambitions beyond just low-Earth orbit. They’re planning on setting up a space station, putting a base on Mars, and eventually sending humans to Mars. So what’s happening in the U.S. that I think might ultimately surpass all of that stuff is entrepreneurial space activities, where things are led by the spirit of free enterprise. And I think there’s perhaps an analogy here where just as DARPA served as the initial impetus for the internet and underwrote a lot of the costs of developing the internet in the beginning, it may be the case that NASA has essentially done the same thing by spending the money to build sort of fundamental technologies in the beginning, and then once we can bring sort of commercial free enterprise sector into it, then we can see the dramatic acceleration that we saw in the internet. So there are several serious launch efforts underway. I’ll talk about each one. There’s Burt Rutan of Scaled Composites. Burt Rutan is one of the world’s foremost aircraft designers and he’s developed a suborbital vehicle that they’re actually flying out of Mojave. And this is an X Prize-class vehicle. There’s John Carmack, who wrote Quake and Doom. He’s probably one of the best software engineers in the world—one of the best engineers that I know, period. And he’s developing a vertical type of landing vehicle. Jeff Bezos, who I understand was here last week, is a huge space advocate. And to my understanding he intends to spend something in the order of a billion dollars over the next 20 years on space exploration. And then my company, SpaceX. And I think within the next several years, these entrepreneurial efforts will actually be what drives space exploration.So a little about each one. That’s a picture of the Burt Rutan effort. It’s called the White Knight. It’s the carrier plane and then SpaceShipOne is the thing that’s held in the belly there. And this project is supposedly funded by Paul Allen. So despite all the capitals — I should make that point — a lot of capital that’s entering this entrepreneurial space sector as well, the only problem I could think of this architecture is that it’s not really scalable for something that would get to orbit. This is pretty good for sub-orbital but it actually needs to change for orbital vehicle. And there’s John Carmack’s effort. He’s a little irreverent. This is from his website. His vehicle is a vertical take off and landing vehicle. He’s made really incredible progress for somebody who has no background in aerospace engineering. And he’s also kind of doing it all himself, with him and three buddies. And I think they will make something that works. You can check out their website, Armadillo Aerospace. It’s pretty interesting stuff. But in order to get into orbit, this would require a substantial improvement in the mass efficiency and the engine efficiency, and probably be a two-stage vehicle. Jeff Bezos, who I’m sure almost everyone here has heard of. He is a pretty huge fan of space and in fact, his high school valedictorian speech was about the necessity of humanity expanding to other planets. So it’s pretty important to him, from what I understand. This is our effort. We’re spending quite a bit more than the three prior entities that I mentioned. In some cases, probably in the order of magnitude or more, because what we are doing is we make an order of magnitude more difficult. If we’re building an orbital launch vehicle, that’s a two-stage, very high efficiency engines, very high mass efficiency launch vehicle. And it’s targeted to the satellite delivery market. So our perch is really to make this a solid sound physics. And it’s predicated on a strategic plan on a known market, something that we know for a fact exists, which is the need to put small to medium-sized satellites into orbit. So that’s what we are going after initially. And then with that as a kind of a revenue base, we will move into the human transportation market. The long-term aims of the company are definitely human transportation. I think a smart strategy is to first go for cargo delivery, essentially, satellite delivery. And our eventual upgrade path is to build the successor to the Saturn V or a super-heavy lift vehicle that could be used for setting up a moon base or doing the Mars mission. That’s the Holy Grail objective. On the upper right there, you could see a test-firing of our engine. And on the lower right, you could see the upper stage attempt. This is an engine test of our main engine, which is called Merlin. And that generates about roughly 75,000 pounds of thrust. At sea level. This is our upper stage engine. That’s about it. That’s about 75 per pounds thrust in a vacuum. And this is an accelerated version of our launch sequence. The first launch would be from the Space-6 Launch Complex at Vandenberg Air Force Base in approximately March of next year, basically early next year. And we will be applying a Navy satellite, a Navy communications satellite. So it’s notable because often, launch vehicle companies are not able to get a paying customer on their first flight. But we’ve been able to do that. This is also the Falcon development at SpaceX. It’s the fastest launch vehicle development in history, including war time. That’s actually Vandenberg Air Force Base, which is about two hours away from Sta. Barbara.Common themes between Zip2 and Paypal? Well, I guess, both of them involved software as the heart of the technology. Even though Zip2 was servicing the media sector. And obviously, Paypal was servicing the financial sector. The heart of it was really software and internet related stuff. So, certainly that’s a huge commonality. They’re both in Palo Alto, where I live. I think we took a similar approach to building both companies. Which was to have a small group of very talented people and keep it small. I think Paypal had, at it’s height, probably 30 engineers for a system that, I would say, is more sophisticated than the Federal Reserve clearing system. I’m pretty sure it is actually because the Federal Reserve clearing system sucks. So, what else is there? Generally, I think the way both Zip2 and Paypal operated was, it was really your canonical Silicon Valley start up. You know, pretty flat hierarchy, everybody had it, roughly, some like you. And anyone could talk to anyone. We have to go for the best idea when’s as oppose to a person proposing the idea winning because they are who they are. Even though there are times when I thought that should have been the way it could. Obviously, everyone was an equity stake holder. If there were two paths that, let’s say, we had to choose through one thing or the other. And one wasn’t obviously better than the other. Then rather spend a lot of time trying to figure out which one was slightly better, we would just pick one and do it. Sometimes we’d be wrong. And we’d pick ourselves from our path. But often it’s better to pick a path and do it than to just vacillate endlessly on a choice. We didn’t worry too much about intellectual property, paperwork or legal stuff. We were really very focused on building the best product that we possibly could. Both Zip2 and Paypal were very product-focused companies. We were incredibly obsessive about how do we evoke something that is really going to be the best possible customer experience. And that was a far more effective selling tool than having a giant sales force or thinking of marketing gimmicks or twelve-step processes or whatever.I’m not super familiar with Friendster. I mean the essence of viral marketing is do you have something where one customer is going to sell to another customer without you having to do anything. There are lots of instances of that, Friendster might be one. Obviously, Hotmail was one. PayPal was one. eBay was one. In a situation like that, going back to what I said about product, a product matters incredibly because if you’re going to recommend something to somebody, you got to really love the product experience; otherwise, you’re not going to recommend it because you don’t want to burn your friend.The hurdles entering the space industry, well, it is a very complicated regulatory structure. As you might imagine, when somebody tries to build an orbital launch vehicle which is not really all that distinguishable from an ICBM, there’s a lot of regulation and there probably should be because you don’t want to launch something and end up hitting LA where I live. So probably the regulatory stuff was very difficult. The environmental approvals certainly have proven very difficult much more so than we expected. I mean here in Silicon Valley, what I came to appreciate is in Silicon Valley you live in a libertarian paradise. There is almost no regulation. What can be very frustrating is that regulation is often irrational; it doesn’t make any sense but you’ve got somebody there who’s simply executing a set of rules independent of where those rules make sense and you can try to convince them that rules don’t make sense and they won’t listen to you. So probably regulation is the most annoying thing. I would say overall though, I’m very pleased because I think we’ve had a very smooth development process and on the whole, I can’t complain at all.Why is it so expensive to send something into space? Well, let me tell you what makes a rocket hard. The energy in the blasting required to get into orbit is so substantial that compared to, say, a car or even a plane, you have almost no margin to play with. Typically, a launch vehicle will get about 2% of it’s lift off mass to orbit. And that’s the case for Falcon. So if you can only get 2% of what your rocket weighs, to begin with, to orbit. If you’re wrong by 2%, you’re not going to get anything to orbit. You know, come crying down at the Pacific for it. That means all of your calculations have to be right. If you miss calculate something. You get an answer wrong. It blows up. And it’s very expensive trying to get all your answers right. And then double checking if they’re right. And testing them all and doing as much as you can on the ground. I think that’s a lot of what makes rockets expensive. The low launch rate, typically, is also what makes rockets expensive. If you had thousands of flights a year then it would be a lot cheaper. Or it’s a bit of a chicken and egg. Because it needs to be cheaper in order to have thousands of flights a year. But at the end of the day, in the final analysis, I would say, that rockets really should be a lot cheaper than they are today. And I think the way they’re bought, the way they’re operated is just very inefficiently. And I think with Space X and Falcon we’re going to show that that’s the case. Our vehicle will sell for about $6 million a flight. Our nearest competitor is the Pegasus from Orbital Sciences which is about $25 million a flight. And that has less capability than our rocket. So Falcon will represent a pretty substantial breakthrough on the cost backs of space.Can you talk a little bit about difference in the customer base you have targeted in SpaceX that enforces experiences with PayPal how much challenge that presents? Yes. The customer base with SpaceX is dramatically different obviously from PayPal. PayPal is a consumer product whereas SpaceX we’re selling rockets and the number of people who want to buy rockets is quite small. If anyone here has explained to everyone a rocket, I’d be glad to sell it to him. So it’s much more of an individual selling process. There’s a great deal more thought that goes to any purchase of a launch, much more so that signing up a PayPal account which doesn’t really cost you much, and there’s not a lot of viral marketing that’s going to happen with a rocket I suspect. I’m hoping but I’m not counting on it.I think successful entrepreneurs probably come in all sizes, shapes and flavors. I’m not sure there’s any one particular thing. For me, some of the things I’ve described already I think are very important. I think really an obsessive nature with respect to the quality of the product is very important and so being an obsessive compulsive is a good thing in this context. Really liking what you do, whatever area that you get into, even if you’re the best of the best, there’s always a chance of failure so I think it’s important that you really like whatever you’re doing. If you don’t like it, life is too short. I’d say also, if you like what you’re doing, you think about it even when you’re not working. It’s something that your mind is drawn to and if you don’t like it, you just really can’t make it work I think.SpaceX is about 30 people and what we do internally in SpaceX is we do all of the design analysis, integration of hardware, testing and then launch operations. But a lot of the heavy manpower stuff like welding together our primary structure, the heavy machining and so forth that we outsource, so we’d be a much larger company if we did all that internally. So you had another part to your question? Just lawyers… Actually we don’t have any lawyers. The regulatory stuff that we deal with is very technical. It’s really a lot like trying to get an airplane certified with the FAA. We’re just getting a rocket certified. I wish we could offload it to some lawyers. They wouldn’t know what the heck to do, so.How did the Wharton degree help? I think for instance teachers with a lot of the terminology, introduces you to concepts that you would otherwise, there’s terminology there’s something to be said for that, introduces you to concepts you would otherwise have to learn empirically. I mean I think you can learn whatever you need to do to start a successful business either in school or out of school. A school in theory should help accelerate that process and I think oftentimes it does. It can be an efficient learning process, perhaps more efficient than empirically learning lessons. I mean there are examples of successful entrepreneurs who never graduated high school and there are those that have PhDs. So I think the important principle is to be dedicated to learning what you need to know, whether that is in school or empirically.Well, I should point out that Falcon, our first vehicle, doesn’t really have the same capability as either the Chinese, the Russian or the space shuttle vehicles that I mentioned. Falcon would be in the light class of launch vehicles, whereas the space shuttle would be a heavy-class launch vehicle so it’s not quite apples to apples comparison. However, the right comparison would be Falcon compared to the Pegasus from Orbital Sciences. Falcon is six million; the Pegasus is 25 million. The way we’ve gotten our prices low, our cost low is we’ve really focused on every element of the launch vehicle. There’s really no one silver bullet that has been responsible for a substantial portion of the cost savings. It’s been really hundreds of small innovations and improvements, and so we’ve done improvements in the propulsion system, the structure, the avionics and the launch operations as well as maintain a very low overhead organization. When you add up all the things we’ve done in those areas, that allows us to produce the launch vehicle at $6 million. As far as PayPal, there were a lot of back-office relationships that we needed to establish and to attach to various heterogeneous data sources. We needed to attach to the credit card system for processing credit cards. We needed to attach to the Federal Reserve System for doing electronic funds transfers. We needed to attach to various fraud databases to run fraud checks. There was a lot that we had to interface with. That took a while. It all came together I think roughly simultaneously. I mean developing the software and having it ready for the general public reasonably coincided with us being able to conclude those deals and interface with the outside vendors, and all that took about a year. I think one thing that’s important is to try not to serialize dependencies, so if you can put as many elements in parallel as possible. A lot of things have a gestation period and there’s really nothing you can do to accelerate; I mean it’s very hard to accelerate that gestation period. So if you can have all those things gestating in parallel then that is one way to substantially accelerate your timeline. I think people tend to serialize things too much.We did do a few patents on the PayPal system although nothing that ever actually mattered. Our patents are mostly useful in a defensive situation rather than offensive. It can be very difficult actually to offensively prosecute a patent. I think in certain industries like pharmaceuticals and so forth, patents can be incredibly important. In software, particularly when you’ve got a very rapid lifecycle where you’re sure you got a patent but now it’s redundant so who cares. It’s less relevant when you got a raid lifecycle.There are a couple of things that I think are pretty bogus. One is space mining, another is space solar power. I mean if you calculate how much it costs to bring either the photons from space solar power back to earth or the raw material back to earth, the economics don’t make sense. They just can’t close the economic case. It’s probably off by three order of magnitude. So I think probably the biggest thing that could happen is if we decide to establish a base on the Moon or a base on Mars and particularly, if we attempt to make a self-sustaining base, self-sustaining civilization on the Moon or Mars, that is an enormous opportunity on probably the trillion-dollar level because then you have basically interplanetary commerce going on. I think that’s pretty huge, but it’s not going to be space solar power; it’s not going to be space mining I think.Let’s see. The government, maybe we’re being spied upon, I don’t know, but certainly there are some restrictions which are really annoying; such as the fact we’re only allowed to employ people who have at least a green card or a citizen of the US. We’re not allowed to employ anyone who does not have permanent residency in the U.S. If they can’t throw you in jail, they won’t let you work on rocket stuff. If we talk to any foreign nationals, we need a technology transfer agreement or something like that for the State Department. Our second launch is actually a non-US governmental launch and it has taken us six months to get the State Department approval just to engage in a contract discussion with them. So that is problematic.We had several offers actually from a number of different entities for Paypal and in fact the close we got to IPO, the more offers we got but we always felt that those undervalued the company and subsequently when we went public, I think the public markets kind of indicated the value of the company. That’s one of the good things about public markets. It’s that they’re an objective valuer of companies. When you’re a private company it’s very hard to say how much you’re worth because you have to basically think of some metric. Are you going to go for multiple of future earnings? Are you going to go off something of revenue? What are your comparables going to be? There are all sorts of questions. It’s really up for debate what sort of value your company is. When you’re public, it’s what the market says you’re worth, that’s what you’re worth. Yes. eBay made a number of offers prior to going public that would substantially blow the value once we went post public and that kind of cleared up the disagreement and then we sold them. What else? Actually you had a second part to the question. I’m just wondering if you were concerned on getting any traction to a solution. Yes. eBay had initially Billpoint and then there was eBay Payments and it was a really pretty tough long running battle of Paypal versus eBay’s payment system. It was certainly very challenging. I think there were times when it felt like we were trying to win a land war on Asia and they kind of set the ground rules or trying to beat Microsoft in their own operating system. It’s really pretty hard. That took a lot of our effort to actually beat eBay on their own system. One of the long-term risks certainly for the company was that eBay would one day prevail and one way to retire that risk obviously was to sell to eBay.Writing software during the summer of ’95. Trying to make useful things happen on the internet. I wrote something that allowed you to keep maps and directions on the internet and something that allowed you to do online manipulation of content; kind of a really advanced blogging system. Then we started talking to small newspapers and media companies and so forth. We started getting some interest. I mean, half of the time it’d be like watch the internet, you in Silicon Valley. But then occasionally, somebody would buy it and we get a little bit of money from them. There were, basically, only six of us. There were myself, my brother, who I convince to come down from Canada; and a friend of my Mom’s. And then three sales people we hired on contingency by putting an ad in a newspaper. But things were pretty tough in the early going. I didn’t have any money. In fact, I had negative money. I had huge student debts. In fact, I couldn’t afford a place to stay and an office. So I rented an office instead. Because, actually, I got a cheaper office than I could get a place to stay. I just slept on the futon and shouted the YMCA on Paige Mullen. It was the best shape I’ve ever been. There was shower work out and you’re good to go. There was an ISP on the floor below us. Just like a little tiny ISP. And we’d draw a hole through the floor and connect to the main cable. That gave us our internet connectivity like a hundred bucks a month. So we had just an absurdly tiny burn rate. And we also had a really tiny revenue screen. But we actually had more revenue than we had expenses. So when we went and talked to VP’s we could actually say we had positive cash flow. That helps, I think.Well, like I said, there’s no silver bullet that I can point to as to why our vehicle is a lot cheaper. We’re really focused on reducing the cost across the board. I mean one thing, our overhead in a 30-person company is in order of magnitude less than it is in Lockheed or Boeing just for starters. So even if we did everything the same in both the same launch vehicles, we’d be conservatively cheaper. Every decision we’ve made has been with consideration to simplicity and the reason for simplicity is because that both improves reliability as well as reduce your costs. If you’ve got fewer components that’s fewer components to go wrong and fewer components to buy. I think a fairly significant innovation in our airframe which is semiprecious stabilized monocoque with variable skin thickness and a common bulkhead, if you know what that means. I’ll need a diagram to explain at all but the net result is that it’s very cheap and it’s very mass efficient and I think easy to test and quite reliable. Our avionic system, I’ll give you another example, we use an Ethernet on the vehicle to communicate. That may not sound like a great innovation but it is in launch vehicles. All the other launch vehicles communicate in the vehicle by these serial cables that run the entire length of the vehicle, so you’ve got these giant copper bundles as thick as your arm running up and down the vehicle. It makes it heavy, it makes it expensive. So there are things like that which when you add them all up, it makes a huge difference.No. That’s a good question. No, I would not. I think SpaceX, this is advanced entrepreneuring. I can’t tell you how many people have said that the fastest way to make a small fortune in the aerospace industry is to start with a large one so hopefully that doesn’t work out. I think space is a tough one for first-time entrepreneurs. You’re better off starting with something that requires low capital and space is a high-capital effort. Sorry. Last question?Thank you for having me, it's really an honor to speak here at The National Press Club.I have an exciting announcement with respect to space and I think one which should be able to provide some inspiration and some belief that innovation is alive and well in America and going in really interesting directions. I'm going to get to that but I'm going to preface that with the logic why such a thing is important, because it may not be immediately obvious.So first of all, going to back to why I am in space and electric cars and solar power and Internet and stuff, it really goes back to when I was in college and I was trying to think of what were the most important things that would affect the future of humanity. What could have a significant positive effect on the future of humanity, and the three things that I came up with were, the Internet, sustainable energy, both in production and consumption, and space exploration but specifically making life multi-planetary, and I didn't expect when I was in college to actually be involved in all three of those areas but as a result of some success in the Internet arena, that gave me the capital to get involved in very high capital endeavors like cars and rockets, which really are very high capital.I'm mostly going to talk about space. So I want to explain why do I think space is really important, and what about space? Because I believe in building things up from a rational framework of logic and so you start with, sort of, how do you decide that anything is important? And I think the lens of history is a helpful guide here, in that things that may seem important in the moment but aren't that important in the grand schemeover time, if you look at things over a broad span of time, things that are less important sort of fall away. If you look at things from the broadest possible span of time, as relates to life itself, the evolution of life has beenprimitive life, I think, started around 3.5 to 3.8 billion years ago, and what are the important steps in the evolution of life? Obviously there was the advent of single celled life, there was differentiation into plants and animals, there was life going from the oceans to land, there was mammals, consciousness, and I would argue, also on that scale should fit, life becoming multi-planetary.In fact, I think, it is consciousness which makes this the next step. You really need consciousness to design vehicles that can transport life over hundreds of millions of miles of irradiated space to an environment that they did not evolve to exist in. It would be very convenient, of course, if there was another planet just like Earth nearby, but that's unlikely and as it turns out, not the case. So there's no way for life to just, by dint of natural selection, just sort of get over to Mars and survive. So you need consciousness, but I think it is the next natural step. If one could make a reasonable argument that something is important enough to fit on the scale of evolution, then it's important, and maybe worth a bit of our resources.One can also think of it from a standpoint of life insurance. There's some chance, either as a result of something humanity does, or as a result of something natural like a giant asteroid hitting us or something, that civilizationlife as we know itcould be destroyed. There's clear evidence for life being destroyed, multiple times, in the fossil record. So, we don't need to guess that this is something that can occur, it already has occurred. The permian extinction being a particularly interesting one as I think that destroyed between 90 to 95% of all species on Earth, which doesn't tell the full story as most of the remaining species were fungi. So, unless you're a mushroom, you're out of luck.If we think it's worth buying life insurance on an individual level, then perhaps it's worth spending more thanspending something on life insurance for life as we know it, and arguably that expenditure should be greater than zero. Then we can just get to the question of what is an appropriate expenditure for life insurance, and if it's something like a quarter of a percent of the GDP that would be okay. I think most people would say, okay, that's not so bad. You want it to be some sort of number that is much less than what we spend on health care but more than what we spend on lipstick. Something like that, and I like lipstick, it's not like I've got anything against it. Can't wait for that comment to go out there. So that's kinda the thing that II think it's important that we give a little bit of our mindset towards.I think it's also one of the most inspiring and interesting things that we could try to do. It's one of the greatest adventures that humanity could ever embark upon. You know, life has to be about more than solving problems. If all that life is about is solving problems then why bother getting up in the morning? There have to be things that inspire you to be proud to be a member of humanity. The Apollo program is certainly an example of that. Only a handful of people went to the Moon, and yet, actually, we all went to the Moon. We went with them vicariously. We shared in that adventure. I don't think anyone would say that was a bad idea. That was great. You know, we need more of those things. Or, at least, we need some of those things. Even if someone is in a completely different industry and a completely different walk of life, it's still something that's going to make you feel good about the world, and that's the other reason why I think we should try to do these great things.Then now, let's get to the question of, well, how do you do these things? How do you make life multi-planetary? What are the fundamental obstacles to that? Because it's all well and good if everyone agrees that that's worth doing, but if we can't do it, well, it doesn't matter. So, the pivotal breakthrough that's necessary, that some company has got to come up with, to make life multi-planetary is a fully and rapidly reusable orbit class rocket. This is a very difficult thing to do because we live on a planet where that is just barely possible. If gravity were a little lower it'd be easier, but if it was a little higher it would be impossible. Even for an expendable launch vehicle, where you don't have to have any recovery, after a lot of smart people have done their best to optimize the weight of the vehicle and efficiency of the engines and the guidance systems and everything, you get maybe 2 to 3% of your liftoff weight to orbit. That's not a lot of room for error. If your rocket ends up being just a little bit heavier, you get nothing to orbit, and this is why only a few countries have ever reached orbit.Now you say, okay, let's make it reusable, which means you've got to strengthen stages, you've got to add a lot of weight, a lot of thermal protection, you've got to do a lot of things that add weight to that vehicle, and still have a useful payload to orbit. Of that meager 2 to 3%, maybe if you're really good you can get it to 4%, you've got to add all that's necessary to bring the rocket stages back to the launch pad and be able to refly them, and still have useful payload to orbit. It's a very difficult thing. This has been attempted many times in the past, and generally what's happened is when people concluded that success was not one of the possible outcomes, the project's been abandoned. Well, some government projects kept going, even when success was not one of the possible outcomes, unfortunately, but then eventually they get cancelled. So it's just a very tough engineering problem.It wasn't something that I thoughtI wasn't sure it could be solved for a while, but then, just relatively recentlyin the last 12 months or soI've come to the conclusion that it can be solved, and SpaceX is going to try to do it. Now, we could fail. I'm not saying we're certain of success here, but we're going to try to do it, and we have a design that, on paper, doing the calculations, do the simulations, it does work. Now, we have to make sure those simulations and reality agree, because generally when they don't, reality wins. That's yet to be determined, and the simulation that you may have seen in the lobby coming in, which will be posted to our website right around now, will show you a simulation of what we plan to do.That simulation is mostly accurate but there are a few errors that were inaccurate. In some cases just to timing constraints we were unable to work with the simulation people to get it completely accurate, and in some cases we're keeping a few technical things under our hat, but it gives you a pretty good idea of what we intend to do. Which is to, basically, for the first stage, after stage separation, to turn the stage around, relight the engines, boost back to the launch page and land propulsively on landing legs, and then, with the upper stage, after dropping off the satellite, or Dragon spacecraft, then do a deorbit burn, reenteryou need quite a powerful heat shieldsteer aerodynamically back to the launch padyou don't actually need wings by the way, it's kind of a common misconception around, you just need some lift over drag number, or lift vectorand steer back to the launch pad, and then land propulsively with the upper stage, also with landing gear. So we'll see if this works, but it's going to be certainly an exciting journey and if it does work it'll be pretty huge.If you look at, say, the cost of a Falcon 9 rocket. It's a pretty big rocket. It's about a million pounds of thrust. It is the lowest cost rocket in the world, and even so, it's about $50 to $60 million, but the cost of the fuel, and oxygen and so forth, is only about $200,000. So obviously, if we can reuse the rocket, say, 1000 times, then that would make the capital costs of the rocket per launch, only about $50,000. There'd be maintenance and other things that we'd factor in there, and fixed costs and some overhead allocation, and what not, but it would allow for about a 100 fold reduction in launch costs, and this is a pretty obvious thing if you think at it applied to any other mode of transport. You can imagine if planes were not reusable, very few people would fly. You know, a 747 is about $300 million. You'd need two of them for a round trip, and yet I don't think anyone here has paid half a billion dollars to fly, and the reason is because those planes can be used tens of thousands of times and so all you're really paying for is fuel, and pilot costs and incidentals. The capital cost is relatively small. That's why it's such a giant difference.I thought of another way. I mentioned that we could probably afford a quarter of a percent of our GDP for making life multi-planetary, that's the cost if you have a fully reusable rocket. The cost if you don't have a fully reusable rocket would be 100% of the GDP, and that would mean no money for food, health care, or anything else. Obviously, that's impossible. So that's why, I think, a fully and rapidly reusable system is fundamentally required for life to become multi-planetary, for us to establish life on MarsMars is the only realistic option for another planetVenus being too hot, Mercury being way too hot, Jupiter being a gas giant and the moons of Jupiter are a possibility but it's much further out and harder in a lot of different ways, and the Moon is sort of too small and resource poor to make life multi-planetary. Emphasis on the planetary, not just to have a little base. A little base is not that interesting, but a self-sustaining human civilization that's on multiple planets, where life could continue even in the event of a calamity on Earth, that is the real thing.Yeah, so I think this is pretty exciting and I think everyone in America and arguably the rest of the world, should be pretty fired up about what we're doing and hopefully wish us well, and we'll do our best to succeed in this regard and it's definitely going to be an adventure. I'll say one final thing, which is, that sometimes people say, well, what is the business model for Mars and sometimes they think, well, can you mine Mars and bring things back and that is not a realistic business model for Mars because it's always going to be far cheaper to mine things on Earth than Mars, but I do think that there's a business model where if you can reduce the cost of a flight to Mars, or moving to Mars, to around the cost of a middle class house in California, which do seem to be rising over time, maybe not recently but certainly still pretty expensive. So maybe to around half a million dollars, then I think you'd have enough people who would buy a ticket and would move to Mars to be part of creating a new planet and be part of the founding team of a new civilization. You'd obviously have to have quite an appetite for risk and adventure but there's 7 billion people on Earth now. There will be probably 8 billion by the mid point of the century, so even if one in million people decided to do that, that's still 8,000 people, and I think maybe more than one in a million people would decide to do that. So that's what I think is perhaps the Mars business model, if you will, and then ultimately Mars can probably export intellectual property like software, inventions and things like that. If you can beam it back with photons, that's a better way to go.Alright, so I'm happy to answer any questions.In the near term, the technology will be applied to launching satellites and to resupplying the space station, taking cargo and crew up there. That's the near term thing and that's what SpaceX's current business is predicated on. We're doing okay in that regard. We've got about three billion dollars in revenue under contract. Yeah, it's okay. It's spread out over the next five years, so it's not all at once, unfortunately, and we do have to do lots of things to get that money, but that's not bad. We have been profitable for the last four years. Not hugely profitable but moderately profitable, and we expect to be the same this year, and I think that's somewhat necessarily. Obviously if the amount of money going out exceeds the amount of money coming in, then sooner or later we'll die. So we have to make sure that we have more money coming in than going out, but that seems to be going reasonably well. If measured by launch contracts awarded, that is correct. The United States has been uncompetitive in the international launch market for a long term and Russia has actually been the leader in that regard, followed by Europe and then, to a lesser degree, India and China. Although China is growing rapidly. Except in the last few years, where the United States has done the best and that's due entirely to SpaceX.As far as launch is concerned, I think it's fair to say that the United States has by far the most competitive launch capability with SpaceX. The only realistic competitor is China. I tell ya, it's not the most easiest thing, competing with national governments, which are heavily subsidized, and they have certainly set their sites on us, and have told us that. But that's okay, I think we'll win. With respect to China, we have a conscious strategy of filing the absolute minimum number of patents. We file very few patents on the rocket and we've very careful about cyber-security and we're very careful about physical security, because there's obviously history of absconding with intellectual property in China. The enforceability of patents against the Chinese government is zero. Contrast that to Tesla, where Tesla files a lot of patents because the competitors are commercial companies and there's enforceability. But not to worry about launch, we'll take care of that.We do spend a fair bit on space, much more than any other country, from a government standpoint. I think we'll continue to be the biggest spender on space in the United States, but by the same token, I think the budgets in absolute terms will decrease, just because of overall compression on the federal budget. We have a huge budget crisis and largely have our head in the sand and are ignoring the reality that we're spending far more than we're bringing in. That chicken will come home to roost. I think we can expect massive compression of all budgets including space from a government standpoint, just because we simply won't have any other choice.Actually our primary launch facility is Cape Canaveral and we're building a launch site at Vandenburg Airforce Base in California. We're not currently using the Marshall Islands launch site. We did use that initially but the logistics are just too difficult, getting out there. It's like Waterworld out there, it's miles from anywhere. It's convenient in some ways but then inconvenient from a logistics standpoint. So, our primary launch site is Cape Canaveral and then Vandenburg and we also plan on establishing a commercial launch site which wouldbecause it only makes sense. Vandenburg and the Cape are actually air force bases and it makes sense to actually concentrate air force and NASA business at those two facilities and then concentrate commercial launch activity at a commercial launch site, just as occurs with aviation.I should first of all say that SpaceX would not be where it is without the help of NASA, both historically the great things that NASA has done and currently with the business that NASA gives us, and the expert advice and everything, so I should make sure to strongly credit NASA in this arena in terms of how helpful they've been. We do have a bit of a challenge with the air force, and this is something where I'm surprised there is not more journalistic interest because the air force is currently proposing to extend the sole source monopoly of Boeing and Lockheed until 2018. The reasoning given for that is preservation of the industrial base. Although, oddly, for some reason we're not included in the industrial base, and this is doubly odd because the main rocket used by Boeing and Lockheed is the Atlas 5 which has a Russian main engine and a center airframe, the interstage, and the forward airframe, the faring, which are made in Switzerland. So which industrial base are we talking about preserving? The one in Russia? That doesn't make much sense.You know, we have 1% of the lobbying power of Boeing and Lockheed. If this decision is made as a function of lobbying power, we are screwed. I wouldn't in any way consider this to be a diversion. This is a parallel effort and so it's not really impacting our sending of cargo to the space station, nor is it effecting our human spaceflight development activities that we're doing in partnership with NASA. Which is going really well. So think of this as a parallel thing. It doesn't really affect the ascent phase of the vehicle but we're really trying to have the descent phase not be: hits atmosphere and explodes. That's actually what happens to all rockets, otherwise.With the Soyuz failure that occurred recently, it will actually likely result in a delay in our launch to the space station because it sort of pushes out the other missions and NASA rightly wants to have the appropriate level of astronautthe right number of astronauts with the right training and everythingon board the space station when we arrive. So, it looks like things will be more like January for the launch to the space station, and that is contingent upon the Russians meeting the schedule that they've currently stated.I think, despite the recent failure of the Soyuz, it is actually a good vehicle. It has a good track record. I think there may be some concerns going future long term with Russia in that a lot of their expert rocket engineers have retired, because it is much more compelling, financially, going into the oil and gas industry in Russia than it is to go into the rocket industry. So that expertise is tailing off and I think that may lead to decreased reliability for Russian rockets in the future. Hopefully it doesn't.I think long term, like I said, I think long term China is the serious competitor. If you look at Russian rocketry, since the fall of the Soviet Union, there's really been no significant developments. The technology has barely progressed. No new rockets have launched since the fall of the Soviet Union, so obviously what that means is that as soon as that technology level is succeeded then they're rendered redundant and they have no ability to compete, and I think that's what's likely to occur with the Russia launch industry.  5 to 10 years.  I'm quite confident we can take on China. Maybe I'm overconfident but I'd rather bet on us than China. Could be famous last words.I think here it's important to clarify what can the Falcon 9/Dragon system that we're launching today, what can it do? If the degree of safety required was equivalent to that of the shuttle, we could actually launch astronauts on the next flight. On the one that will likely go up in January. The system is fully capable of carrying biological cargo. You know, which is people. However, what it doesn't have is a launch escape system. The shuttle also does not have a launch escape system. Both NASA and we agree that a launch escape system is a wise move. It will take us about two years, maybe at the outside, three, to develop and qualify the launch escape system and the way we're doing the launch escape system is, I think, a significant innovation beyond what's done in the past where escape thrusters are bolted into the sidewall of the spacecraft, so you can actually use those same thrusters for propulsive landing. Which is cool, and we're actually talking with NASA about potentially doing missions to Mars and other places using Dragon as a general science delivery platform. To various places in the solar system. So that's an important distinction. We could launch astronauts next flight, if requirements were the same as the shuttle, but if we want to add a launch escape system, it's two to three years.Relatively speaking, we’re a pretty open and transparent company. There are some restrictions here, which are ITAR restrictions, and they’re not restrictions that we have any choice over, because advanced rocket technology is considered protected technology. We can’t just publish to the general public a detailed analysis of failure investigations that contain secrets on how to make rockets. That’s actually a violation of the law. All that information is available to NASA and to the FAA, so for missions that we do for NASA, they have a detailed oversight role, and then the FAA as well has an oversight role. If you’re comfortable flying commercial aircraft then you should be pretty comfortable with what we’re doing in commercial rocketry. Yeah, I think that’ll be okay. If you look at all other modes of transport, aircraft, boats, cars, I’m somewhat familiar with cars, there’s loss of life in every mode of transport. “If one set a standard that you couldn’t have loss of life, then there would be no transport. You wouldn’t even be allowed to walk.” You have to allow for some amount of risk. It needs to be reasonable and measured, but you have to allow for that. I think a commercial company, arguably, would be better able to deal with that than a government entity because if you’re the government then you have the congressional hearings and it tends to become sometimes a political football.  Oh sure. That certainly occurs when it appears like there’s been a violation of the rules or something like that, but as long as things are within the rulesobviously there’s fatal car accidents every day but you don’t get a congressional hearing on it.Certainly NASA is our largest customer and our most important customer, but if you look at our launch manifest we have over thirty Falcon 9 missions under contract, thirteen of those are with NASA, so effectively we’ve got about 40% or so of our business with the government. “Let’s say you made pencils, well, about 40% of your business would be with the government. That’s not an unreasonable number.”If you look at the amount of money that is allocated to commercial space, relative to the overall NASA budget, you’ll see it’s a pretty small number. Last fiscal year it was about $300 million but that was split over four companies. We got about $75 million or something like that. That’s about a half of a percent of the NASA budget. “It’s important to bear in mind that we’d love to hire a lot more people than we currently hire but we also can’t run out of money and die.” So we can only hire a few people. In terms of what characteristics we look for, we’re generally quite engineering centric so we’re big fans of what have people done from a hard core engineering standpoint. What tough engineering problems have they solved. How they solved them. We’re less interested if it’s been more of a paper oriented role that they’ve had because we try to minimize that at SpaceX.  Well, that’s a tough question to answer. I think we’re probably more demanding. NASA’s a large organization. I think the level of demand on people based in different parts of NASA varies significantly. I’m sure that there’s parts of NASA which are just as demanding, maybe more demanding than SpaceX, but SpaceX is an extremely demanding organization and we expect people to work super hard and be very good at their job.“The climate debate is an interesting one. If you ask any scientist, are you sure that human activity is causing global warming, any scientist should say no. Because you can not be sure. On the other hand, if you said, do you think we should put an arbitrary number of trillions of tons of CO2 into the atmosphere and just keep doing it until something bad happens, they’ll probably say no too.” We, essentially, are running an experiment, and that experiment is to test the carbon capacity of the oceans and the atmosphere. Now, that experiment may turn out to be fine. It may also turn out to be really bad. I just don’t understand why we would run that experiment. Particularly when you consider that, at some point, we have to get to something that is sustainable. We have to have sustainable production of energy, and consumption of energy because, tautologically, if it is unsustainable you will run out of it. You can certainly say, well, let’s say hypothetically, CO2 was good for the environment, and let’s say hypothetically, the United States possessed all the oil in the world. Well, you’d still have to get off oil, because it’s a finite resource and as you start to run out of it, the scarcity would drive the cost up and cause economic collapse. So why not do it sooner? I’m not saying it has to be a radical or an immediate change, or that people need to inject a great deal of misery into their lives to avoid CO2, but we should lean in that direction. We should lean in the direction of supporting technologies that are sustainable and lean slightly against technologies that are unsustainable. That just seems pretty sensible. Even if environment isn’t a factor. In fact, my interest in electric vehicles predates the current climate issue. I mean, I was interested in electric vehicles 20 years ago when nobody was really talking about global warming, because I just thought it was the obvious means of transport, but I do think the climate thing does add urgency to things and I do think we will see quite a significant increase in the cost of oil. Just from a demographic standpoint you’ve got China, India, and a few other countries that represent almost half the world’s population and have very few cars on the road but are rapidly adding cars to the road. So you can expect a doubling of demand and I think it’s going to be difficult to achieve a doubling of supply.In the case of Solyndra, it’s obviously become somewhat of a political football here. The DOE programs necessarily are portfolio programs where some number of the things that are funded there are going to fail. That should be assumed. You should not assume a 100% success. In the case of Solyndra, people forget that private investors lost twice as much as the government did, and there were some really first rate venture capitalists in Solyndra. It’s not as though these were suckers. If you’ve got first rate venture capitalists who have lost twice as much money as the federal government, you have to say, okay, it was a bet, the bet didn’t work, but that doesn’t mean something really terrible happened. The most you could say is that Solyndra executives were too optimistic. They presented a better face to the situation than should have been presented in the final few months, but then, if they didn’t do that, it would have become a self-fulfilling prophecy ofas soon as a CEO says I’m not sure if we’ll survive, you’re dead. You know, I think people are making too much of this Solyndra thing. Do I think there are parallels with Tesla? I mean, we got a loan from the DOE, from a different program I should point out, but in our case, we have significant capital reserves. We have more money at Tesla than we need to complete the program in question and we don’t face the same issue that Solyndra faced which is extreme competition from China on a commodity product that drove the cost per watt of solar panels from $4/watt down to $1. That’s the fundamental reason Solyndra went down. Solyndra would have been okay at $2/watt but not $1, and that’s it. There’s another thing which is not getting enough press, which is, “how much money do you think the Chinese government has put into solar? Estimates are about $40 billion. Okay? So, we’ve got our team operating on a pittance, and we’ve got China operating on $40 billion, and our team lost. That should be no surprise.” There’s probably a little bit of tarnish, but it’s unwarranted tarnish. The scenario that occurred with the cost per watt of solar was something that I expected would occur. “So if someone had asked me, do you think Solyndra is a good investment, I would have said no, you’re going to get your ass kicked.” Solar City works on an overall system, where they do everything except the panel, and they own the end customer relationship. They’re kind of like Dell or Apple. You know, Apple don’t make the CPU or the memory or the hard drives but they design the overall system and they provide it to customers through the sales and marketing service and that’s what Solar City is. “Solar City is doing super well. They’re growing at 50% to 100% a year with positive cash flow, which is pretty incredible. I just show up at the board meetings to hear the good news. It’s really great.” All credit to those guys. For them, the more rapacious the competition on solar panels, the better.Thanks.There’s lot of great ideas that people come up with all the time. I don’t necessarily wish I’d had them myself, but certainly what Larry and Sergey came up with with Google was really smart, you know, with the backwards links to pages, obviously what Facebook has done, Twitter. I mean, they’re great examples of the Internet. I-Pad, obviously, i-Phone. Apple, Google, Facebook, I mean, these are examples where you’re sort of like, who’s their competition? I’m not even sure.The United Statesit’s sort of like that comment about democracyit’s a bad system but it’s the least bad. “Well, the United States is the least bad at encouraging innovation.” Silicon Valley actually, I’d say, is particular good at encouraging innovation. Silicon Valley is just orders of magnitude better than any place in the world for creating new companies and fostering innovation. It’s quite remarkable. I don’t think we necessarily need to worry about some other country out there out-innovating us. I don’t think people realize that almost all innovation in the world comes from America. A ridiculous percentage. But that doesn’t mean it couldn’t be better. I think we need to be concerned about excess regulation, a tax structure that potentially doesn’t promote innovation. The thing to remember is that when companies are little they’re like tadpoles. I mean, they just die very easily. You need to have an environment that tries to protect little companies and help them get bigger. Silicon Valley does that very well and America, in general, does that very well a lot of the time compared to other countries. Most other countries tend to foster and protect the big companies. Big companies don’t need protection.I was born in South Africa. Lived there until I was 17 and travelledmoved by myself.. do you want to hear the full story?I was born in Pretoria, South Africa. Lived in Johannesburg and Durban as well. I was able to travel to a few countries growing up. Within Africa and around the world. Went to the US when I was.. I don't know.. 10-ish or something like that.I read a lot of comic books, and books. It always seemed like when there was cool technology or things happening, it was kinda always in the United States. My goal as a kid was to get into.. to get to America basically.Well. I read every comic in the store. I liked obviously, Batman, Superman and stuff. The Green Lantern. Ironman. Better not say Ironman first, because then people will think... but I did think that was a pretty cool one. But I read everything. Dr Strange.. if there was a comic on the rack, I read it.When I was about 10 years old I went into a store in South Africa and bought a Commodore VIC 20 and.. I guess maybe I was 9 years old.. I thought it was the most awesome thing I had ever seen. You could write computer programs and make games. I'd played Atari and other things, other game consoles, when I was maybe 6 or 7. So the idea of being able to create games, I thought it was very exciting. That was my first computer.. I think it had like 8k of memory.I wouldn't say that I always knew I wanted to be an entrepreneur. I actually wasn't sure what I wanted to do growing up. I think at one point I thought inventing things or creating stuff would be a cool thing to do. But I wasn't really sure if that meant starting a company or whether that meant working for a company that made cool stuff. In fact, when I first came out to Silicon Valley, it was to do graduate studies at Stanford in applied physics and pure science. In '95 I kinda thought the Internet would be something that would change the world in a major way and I wanted to be a part of it. Actually, what I first started to do, was I tried to get a job at Netscape. I wouldn't actually try to start a company, I'd try to get a job at Netscape.I didn't get any reply. I mean I had a physics and economics degree, or physics and business degree from Wharton, and I was doing grad studies applied physics and materials science.. I guess that.. I mean, I didn't have a computer science degree or several years working at a software company. For whatever reason, I didn't get a reply from Netscape and I actually tried hanging out in the lobby.. but I was too shy to talk to anyone. So I'm just like standing in the lobby.. it was pretty embarrassing. I was just standing there trying to see if there's someone I can talk to but I just couldn't.. I was too scared to talk to anyone. So I left.I was just writing software that summer and it got to the start of the quarter at Stanford so I had to make a decision and I decided to go on deferment. I figured if I start a company and it doesn't work then I can always go back and graduate school. So I talked to the chairman of the department and he let me go on deferment and I said I'd probably be back in 6 months and he said he was probably never going to hear from me again and he was correct. I've never spoken to him since.So I started a company with my brother and a friend of mine Greg Kouri and the three of us created Zip2 which.. the initial idea was to create software that would help bring the media companies online. So we helped, in a small way, bring companies like The New York Times, and so forth, online. There weren't always online, people don't realize that.I started off being the CEO. I was CEO for probably the first year and then.. but after we got VC funding, the venture capitalists wanted to hire a professional CEO.At the time I thought it was a good idea. Because I didn't really know what I was doing, and I figured they would hire someone who is really good and that person would increase the chances of the success of the company. So that seemed like a good thing and I could work on software and product direction and that's what I like doing. So that seemed like a great thing. I think in retrospect that wasn't the best thing. The person that was hired, in my opinion, was actually not that great. I think, quite frankly, the company succeeded in spite of that person, not because of them.I read a lot of books and talked to lots of people. I didn't have any one person who was a mentor but I always looked for feedback from the people around me and feedback from the historical context, which is books basically.I don't read many general business books. I like to read biographies or autobiographies. I think those are pretty helpful, and a lot are not really business. For example, I like Franklin's autobiography and recent written biography on Franklin is really good. You can see how he.. cause he was an entrepreneur.. he started from nothing.. like a runaway kid basically. Created his printing business, how he went about doing that, and over time he goes into science and politics. I would say certainly that he's one of the people I most admire. Franklin was pretty awesome, but I think it's also worth reading books on scientists and engineers. Tesla obviously.. I've contributed some funding to save the land . I like the way  put it: let's have a god damn Telsa museum. Awesome.This kinda goes back to college where I was trying figure out what are the things that would most effect the future of humanity.. and the things that I thought would most effect humanity were: the Internet, sustainable energywhich is both production and consumptionand.. so, like, Solar City is production and Tesla is consumption in a sustainable way, and then also space exploration and specifically making life multiplanetary. Now I didn't expect at the time to be involved in all of those areas, but those were the areas that I thought would most effect the future and as it turned out I was fortunate enough to be involved in those areas.. but that's the thread that connects themit's kinda my best guess at what would most likely effect the future in the biggest way.When I first thought about doing something in space, the thing I was going to do was going to be a philanthropic mission to Mars to land a small greenhouse on the surface of Mars with seeds in dehydrated nutrient gel. They'd be hydrated upon landing and you'd have this little greenhouse on Mars and you'd have this great shot of green plants on red background. The public could respond to superlatives. I thought that would get people really excited about sending life to Mars. My expectation from that project would be 100% loss. Maybe I would make a little bit back on advertising or sponsorship or something but it would be essentially a complete loss. So starting a rocket company would necessarily have a greater likely outcome than 0% in the short term.At the beginning of starting SpaceX I thought that the most likely outcome was failure.In terms of the electric car company.. at first I thought there would be no need to do an electric car company startup because California regulations basically forced General Motors to create the Volt.. or rather, the EV-1 I should say.. so when General Motors had the EV-1 I thought hey, this is great, the biggest car company in the world is making an electric car. It's called EV-1, that would imply that there's going to be an EV-2, 3, 4.  and that was very unwise. It's really short sorted, I mean it's really unwise, in restrospect that's obvious. They not only cancelled that project, they forcibly removed the EV-1s that they'd given out.. that they had only gave out on lease. They removed them from customers against their wishes. Took the cars and crushed them in the yard so they could never be used again. The customers who's cars had been taken away, they tried legal action to try to.. they tried to sue General Motors to keep their cars. They actually had a candle lit vigil at the yard where the cars got crushed, and it's like, you know, when was the last time there was a candle lit vigil for a product? You know that's pretty ridiculous. Let alone a General Motors product. I mean, you have to be pretty tonedeaf to.. you don't need to do a customer survey to figure out that at least some number of people want these cars if they are treating it like somebody has been sentenced to death. Holy crap, if this is not going to happen, there needs to be a new car company that comes in and shows that it can be done.The key thing that we’ve done is show that you can make an electric car that was good looking, high performance, long range and if you made such a car that people would buy it. They don’t have some fundamental affinity for gasoline.My initial thought was that I did not want to create an electric car company and run it myself because I was running SpaceX and the idea of running two companies.. that’s a lot of work. Just like, imagine if a person had two pretty demanding jobs.. or you had one pretty demanding job and now you have to do two of them. That kinda takes the fun away.Something’s gotta give.My initial thought was I’ll hire some people and work the team and I’ll work on the part design and the overall strategy or something, but I’ll leave the day to day operations to a CEO that I hire. Unfortunately that didn’t work out. I’ve actually tried hiring a couple of CEOs and I guess I couldn’t find the right person and so it came to 2008 and.. I was kinda co-CEO from 2007 to 2008 while trying to bring some other people up to speed, and thenwhen the market fell apartI had a choice between committing all my remaining resources in Tesla or it’s gunna die for sure. I thought okay, if I’m going to do that I’ve got to bite the bullet and run the company, because there’s just too much at stake. When you’ve got all your chips on the table, you’ve got to play the hand yourself. I don’t know, it just blows my mind. You can take a body panel and stamp it with this shape or that shape and yet they choose to do the bad shape.. but it costs the same either way. There are some things that cost a little more in terms of the quality of materials and getting things to fit accurately.. so there are few things that cost more but a lot of it doesn’t. You know, you can make an ugly expensive car, you can make a good looking expensive car.. and the same goes for affordable good looking cars or an ugly affordable car. I think the cost differences are really relatively small. I don’t know. I think maybe large car companies are just trapped in their own history. No, it’s literally just a series of weekly iterations with the design team. Every Friday afternoon I meet with the design and the engineering team and we go over every nuance of the car. Every bumper, every curve, every little piece of the car. What’s right, what’s wrong, and then that has to be filtered against the engineering needs and the ergonomic needs, and the regulatory requirements. So it’s a really.. there’s a lot of constraints. You can’t make a car just any old shape you want. It has to achievemeet all the regulatory requirements, the crash safety and all that. It just requires a lot of iterative activity and caring about every millimeter of the car. That’s what results in a good product.The hyper loop.. I need to set aside some time to actually write down some of the details. I want to make sure I don’t say something completely stupid. I’m spending time with both the SpaceX aerodynamics team and the Tesla aerodynamics team, just to make sure that whatever I put out there really will work.I think it genuinely would be a new mode of transport. I think one way to think of it is like it’s.. it’s kinda like a ground-based Concorde.If you could make something go as fast as a Concorde, on the ground, how would you do that?We shall see. No actually, I think rails are not needed.I’ve got more ideas than time to implement. I think so. This sounds really cliche, but like, the shower is probably like the most.. wake up, go shower in the morning and I think so what’s really happened is things have percolated in the subconscious and it’s not really occurring in the shower but you’re kinda getting the results from last night’s you know, computation, basically. And then sometimes it’s late at night, if I can’t sleep and there’s something bothering me, then it’ll occur then.One key idea for a supersonic, vertical takeoff and landing electric plane occurred to me at Burning Man. It’s a very creative place.I think in terms of advice, I think it is very important to actively seek out and listen very carefully to negative feedback. This is something people typically tend to avoid because it’s painful. But I think this is a very common mistaketo not actively seek out and listen to negative feedback.Everyone I talk to is ain fact, when friends get a product I say look, don’t tell me what you like, tell me what you don’t like. Because otherwise your friend is not going to tell you what he doesn’t like. He’s going to say ‘I love this, and that’ and leave out the ‘this is the stuff I don’t like’ list. Because he wants to be your friend and, you know, doesn’t want to offend you. So you really need to coax negative feedback, and you know if someone is your friend, or at least not your enemy, and they’re giving you negative feedback, thenthey may be wrong, but it’s coming from a good place. And sometimes even your enemies give you good negative feedback.So I think that’s important. I suppose it should just be like, positive feedback is like water off a duck’s back. That’s like, really underweight that and overweight negative feedback.I also think it is important to reason from first principles, rather than, by analogy. So the normal way we conduct our lives is we reason by analogy. We’re doing this because it’s like something else that was done or like what other people are doing. Iterations on a theme. It’s kinda mentally easier to reason by analogy rather than from first principles. First principles is kinda a physics way of looking at the world and what that really means is you kinda boil things down to the most fundamental truths and say okay, what are we sure is true? or sure as possible is true? and then reason up from there. That takes a lot more mental energy.Somebody could say.. in fact, people do.. that battery packs are really expensive and that’s just the way they’ll always be, because that’s the way they’ve been in the past. Well, no, that’s pretty dumb, because if you applied that reasoning to anything new, then you would never be able to get to that new thing. You can’t say, oh, horsesnobody wants a car because horses are great and we’re used to them and they can eat grass and there’s lot of grass all over the place and you know, there’s no gasoline that people can buy, so people are never going to get cars. People did say that, you know. And for batteries, they would say, oh, it’s going to costyou know, historically it’s cost $600 per kWh and so, it’s not going to be much better than that in the future, and you say no, what are the batteries made of? So first principles means you say okay, what are the material constituents of the batteries? What is the spot market value of the material constituents? So you can say, it’s got: cobalt, nickel, aluminum, carbon and some polymers for separation and a steel can. So break that down on a materials basis and say okay, if we bought that on the London metal exchange, what would each of those things cost? Like, oh, jeez, it’s like $80 per kWh. So clearly, you just have to think of clever ways to take those materials and combine them into the shape of a battery cell. and you can have batteries that are much much cheaper than anyone realizes. It’s the single biggest item but it’sright now it’s not any kind of obstacle to us. There’s a whole bunch of little issues that, are kind of trivial, that are challenges when you’re making a new product because there are several thousand unique parts in the car, 90% of them are fine, 5% of them are slightly problematic, 3% or 4% are are problematic and 1% are extremely problematic. But you can’t ship a car that is 99% complete. With software you just have to get stable functionality, but with a car, you know, you can’t ship it without a steering wheel, or without a back seat, or anything like that.Thanks for coming by.Thanks. Well, I think I'll just talk a little bit about the anomaly that we experienced and we did have an issue with the Dragon spacecraft briefly on the way to the space station. The rocket performed very well, flawlessly as far as we could tell. We did have a slight issue with the propellant check valves, which we were able to fix within about four or five hours and then get to the space station about a day later, and there were no further issues after that. I think we understand the root cause of that and have addressed that in future vehicles and so we don't expect to see that issue again. Yeah, I think I'll just leave it at that.Gwynne Shotwell:Yeah, we are currently scheduled to launch late this fall with CRS-3. There's a number of upgrades to that particular Dragon configuration, which is going to give NASA even more of the critical types of cargo that they're looking to both bring up and bring back.Elon Musk:It's actually also worth noting that it will be with the new version of Falcon 9, which  some fairly significant upgrades on the vehicle side, both to improve performance and to improve reliability. It's capable of actually, really, maximizing the payload of Dragon. We can, as much as you can basically pack in Dragon, we can send up. It could potentially raise the useful payload of Dragon by several tons. This is also the version of Falcon 9 where we will attempt to recover the first stage. Although, as I've said before, I think it's going to take us several flights before we are successful in that. I'm not sure it'll be this flight where we are successful, but that is our aspiration and that is one of the key design goals of the new version of Falcon 9.Sure, this is obviously going a little off-topic on the CRS flight, but I'll just spend one minute on it. I'd like to say thanks to the folks at NASA Glenn, who operate Plumb Brook, for helping us out here. Their assistance is much appreciated. It's an awesome facility. If you've seen pictures of it, it's really epic. Super cool. We're just assembling the fairing right now to do the vacuum separation tests, which are quite exciting tests, because it's a giant giant fairing. We'll be releasing information, probably in the next few weeks about how those tests go. Ya know, they are tests, so things could definitely go wrong, but yeah, I just want to give a special thanks to the NASA Glenn folks.I’ll make some brief comments and then maybe Charlie can share the perspective of NASA on how things are going. Things seem to be going pretty well. We’re passing our milestones and making, I think, good progress. We’re hoping to do the pad abort tests fairly soon. Potentially later this year. That’s going to be an exciting test and we’re hoping to unveil, actually, what Dragon version two looks like, also later this year. We’ll work with NASA on that unveiling. I think it’s coming along really well. As with the cargo program, the partnership with NASA, from our perspective, is going really well and it’s just a really great partnership.The problem was a very tiny change to a check valve that served the oxidizer tanks on Dragon. Three of the check valves were actually different from the prior check valves that have flown in a very very tiny way. It’s difficult to describe verbally. You have to really see a diagram. Because of that tiny change, they got stuck. What we were able to do was write some new software, in real time, and then upload that to Dragon where we built pressure upstream of the check valve and then released that pressure to give it kind of a kick. It’s like the spacecraft equivalent of the Heimlich maneuver. That basically got the valves unstuck, and once they got unstuck they worked really well. So yeah, it was definitely a worrying time. We also had some difficulty communicating with the spacecraft, because it was drifting… kind of in free drift in orbit. So we were able to work with the air force and get higher intensity dishesmore powerful dishesto communicate with the spacecraft and upload the software, do that pressure slam maneuver and get things unstuck, and from then on it worked really well.The software that we uploaded was really just to get the valves unstuck, so we don’t need any software changes in the future. We really just need to fix this tiny tiny little issue with the valve. It’s essentially reverting it to what it was. It’s really such a subtle change, but we’ve been through some checks to just verify that this can’t happen again. I wouldn’t anticipate this to be an issue ever again. As I said, it was a momentary interruption but not something that was, obviously, serious in the end.With respect to the recovery, the initial recovery attempts will be from a water landing. The first stage booster will, after separation, continue in a ballistic arc and execute a velocity reduction burn before hitting the atmosphere, just to lessen the impact. Then, right before sort-of splashdown of the stage, it’s going to light the engine again. So, there will be two burns after stage separation, if things go well. But I really want to emphasize that we don’t expect success in the first several attempts. Hopefully next year, with a lot more experience and data, we should be able to return the first stage to the launch site, deploy the landing legs and do a propulsive landing on landback at the launch site. So, this year is about just recoveringhopefully recoveringthe first stage, at all, from an ocean landing and then next year it’ll be the boost-back, return to launch site, with the landing gear deployed. That’s our aspiration.You mean the return to launch site?  Not a specific flight, but it would be sometimeI’m guessingaround the middle of next year.That’s the exact sentiment that I would express as well. I don’t think a lot of people out there appreciate that NASA and SpaceX are really closely integrated. Like, day to day. It’s not like some sort of hands off thing. It’s really a joint effort. NASA knows everything that we’re doing and we know, at least the stuff that pertains to us, what NASA’s doing. We have high speed data links between Johnson Space Center and the Hawthorn California headquarters of SpaceX. In fact, Charlie was with me in mission control on this last mission and I must say, it’s great to work with NASA. On this last mission, NASA was so cool. What I mean is, like, I was completely unruffled. I was far more anxious than NASA was. I was like, we have one cool customer.It was not a manufacturing tolerance issue, it was actually a tiny design revision change from a supplier. The supplier made some mistakes there, and we didn’t catch those mistakes. Sort of a dual responsibility. We do actually run the system through pressurization checks, but we didn’t previously run them through the high pressure checks. We do a low pressure functionality check, but not a high pressure functionality check. Now we’ve changed the procedure to do a high pressure functionality check and, obviously, both us and the supplier are now extremely sensitive to even the tiny nuanced changes that we’re talking about here. The thing that was kind of interesting was that the check valve didn’t get stuck if you did these low pressure functionality checks and we didn’t expect there to be any difference at the high pressure levels. That was clearly a mistake and we’ll make sure we don’t repeat that in the future. This is definitely a learning process. Literally, if you looked at the valve you’d have to use a magnifying glass to even see the difference.On the rocket side, the next version of Falcon 9 is certainly a meaningful upgrade. It’s a vehicle that has about 60% to 70% more capability than the current, or the old, version of Falcon 9. We’ve really improved the structural efficiency, engine efficiency, the thrust is about 60% greater, and we’ve also improved the redundancy on the vehicle. We’re now moving to a full triple redundant system on the Falcon 9, and also improving the engine to engine protection on the first stage, and the engine to stage protection. As people know, we had an engine go out on us in flight 4 of Falcon 9. The mission completed successfully, but we had an engine go out on us. Proving that we can lose an engine and complete the mission, which is what we always said we could do, but looking at taking that as a lesson and saying, well, how can we even improve the engine protection cell? Going into the next version of Falcon 9 we’ve made it even more robust. The increased capability of the rocket would mean that we could actually lose an engine right after liftoff and still complete the mission. Still have enough capability to complete the mission. So, I think, there’s a number of improvements across the board, in structures, avionics, engines and then, as I said, this version is really designed to be able to have the first stage come backboost back to launch site, deploy landing gear and actually land propulsively. But it will take at least a year I think, for us to get that right, and there will be many losses of stage between now and then.Sorry, I should also mention Dragon version 2. So, there are the upgrades to the rocket, which are more proximate, and then there are some minor upgrades to Dragon which Gwynne was referring to, and then there’s Dragon version 2 which will be a substantial upgrade. That version of Dragon will be capable of landing propulsively on land. That’s going to be a really quite a significant upgrade. The water landings, in the long term, should be a thing of the past, and allow us to do missions with a more rapid tempo, without having to marshal a bunch of ships.I don’t want to jump the gun too much on a future unveiling. We want to work with NASA on that unveiling because I think it would be kind-of a fun thing for the public to see the new version, kind-of up close. It is quite a significant upgrade. There are very powerful thruster pods, side-mounted thruster pods, on the new version of Dragon and quite big windows as well for astronauts to see out. There’s legs that pop out the bottom. “It looks like a real alien spaceship”, if you will. We started off landing in water because that was kind of the easiest thing to do. We didn’t really know what we were doing, honestly, at the beginning. I think we’re getting better, but we didn’t want to take any unnecessary risks, but now we want to really try to push the envelope and see if we can take the technology to where it hasn’t been before.Hopefully later this year. We have to figure out the exact timing, but hopefully later this year.Alright, this was when I was six, so the memory is a little fuzzy at this point but, as I recall, I was grounded for some reason, I don't know why, but I felt it was unjust, and I really wanted to go to my cousin's party, who was fiveso it was a kid's party. At first I was going to take my bike, and I told my mum this, which was a mistake. She told me some story about how you needed a license for a bike and the police would stop me. I wasn't 100% sure if that was true or not, but I thought I better walk, just in case. I sort of thought I knew the way, but it was clear across town, so I was 10 or 12 miles away, it's really quite far. Further than I realized actually. So I just started walking to my cousin's house. I think it took me about four hours. Just as my mum was leaving that party with my brother and sister she saw me walking down the road and freaked out. I saw she saw me, so I then sprinted to my cousin's house and I was just about two blocks away and I climbed a tree and refused to come down.When I was about ten I walked into a computer store in South Africa and saw an actual computer. I'd previously had some sort of early precursors to the Atari system and then I got the Atari system, which I'm sure a lot of people here have played, but then I saw actually having a computer where you could make your own games, and it was a Commodore VIC-20. So that was the first computer I bought, and I got some books on how to teach yourself programming, and this was like the coolest thing I'd ever seen. So I was just like, this is super awesome. So I started programming games and then selling games in order to actually buy more gamesa bit of a circular thingmore games and better computers and that sort of thing. Yeah. Basically I'd spend money on better computers and Dungeons And Dragons modules and stuff like that. Nerdmaster 3000 basically.I did like the comic Ironman, yeah.  I did not. That was prettyI would have said, 0% chance.  I wasn't that much of a loner, at least not willingly, but I certainly was quiteI was very bookish, I was reading all the time. I was either reading, working on my computer, reading comics, playing Dungeons And Dragons, that kind of thing. I guess when I was around 12 or 13, I came to an existential crisis and I was reading various books trying to figure out the meaning of life and what does it all mean? Cause it all seemed quite meaningless. We happened to have some books by Niche and Schopenhauer in the house, which you should not read at age 14, it's bad. It's really negative. But then I read Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy which is quite positive I think and it sort of highlighted an important point which is that a lot times the question is harder than the answer, and if you can properly phrase the question, then the answer is the easy part. So, to the degree that we can understand the universe, then we can better know what questions to ask and then whatever the question is that best approximates 'What's the meaning of life?', you know, that's the question that we could ultimately get closer to understanding, and so I thought well, to the degree that we can expand the scope and scale of consciousness and human knowledge, then that would be a good thing.  Puberty I guess13 through 15, probably the most traumatic years. I did hatch the plan earlier. Actually, I tried to hatch several plans, which did not hatch.  Whenever I'd read about cool technology it would tend to be in the United States, or more broadly, North America, including Canada. So I kinda wanted to be where the cutting edge of technology was and, of course, within the United States, Silicon Valley is where the heart of things is, although, at the time, I didn't know where Silicon Valley wasit sounded like some mythical place. So I wanted to come to the US. I tried to convince my mother or father, who were divorced, if either one would move to the United States then I could get there. At one point I convinced my father and then he reneged, unfortunately. He did say yes, and then he changed his mind.  I don't know. I guess he was fairly established, he was an engineer established in South Africa and didn't want to have to go through that again in another country. So yeah, I actually gotmy mother was born in Canada and her father was American but unfortunately, she didn't get her American citizenship so that broke the link and I couldn't get my American citizenship but she was born in Canada, so, I could getI actually filled out the forms for her and got her Canadian passport and me too, and within three weeks of getting my Canadian passport I was in Canada. I was in Canada for a few years at Queen's University and got a scholarship to go down to University of Pennsylvanian because one of the downsides of coming to a university in North America was that my parents said they would not pay for collegeor, my father said he would not pay for college unless it was in South Africa. So, I could have free college in South Africa or find someone to pay it here and fortunately I got a scholarship at U-Penn and so I did a dual undergraduate in business and physics at U-Penn. I think I was thinking about it for a few years, during freshman and sophomore year at Queen's and then also at U-Penn and I was trying to think, what would most influence the future, what are the problems we have to solve, and I actually talked a lot to friends and my housemates and that sort of thing, and dateswhich was probably not the best thing. I actually met a woman I dated briefly in college who now works at Scientific American as a writer and she related the anecdote that when we went on a date, all I was talking about was electric cars. That was not a winning conversation. She said the first question I asked her was: do you ever think about electric cars? She said no, she never did. That wasn't great, but recently it's been more effective. I was at Penn and there was a professor who was chairman of a company in Silicon Valley who was working on advanced capacitors potentially for use in electric cars. As it turns out they're way too expensive. I thought, well, this is really awesome. I asked if I could get a summer job because it was in Silicon Valley and working on technology for electric cars. I thought, well, that's pretty much as good as it gets. So, I got a summer job hereit was in Los Gatos actually, at Pinnacle Research during electrolytic ultra-capacitors. The problem was that they use ruthenium tetroxide and there was, I think, only a few tons of ruthenium mined in the world, so not very scalable. You know, they'd sell it to you by the milligram. That's seen as a problem. But it had a pretty high energy density, roughly equivalent to lead-acid battery, which for a capacitor is huge.Then I thought, well, Stanford is in Silicon Valley, it's sort of the epicenter, so that's where I wanted to come. Near Stanford or Berkley and Stanford is sort of sunnier, so I liked it. This was the summer of '95 and I'd been working on some Internet software because the three things that I thought would affect the world were Internet, sustainable energy and space explorationmaking like multi-planetary, but on the Internet thing, I just couldn't figure out how to make enough money to feed myself. If I couldn't make money then I'd run out of food and die. That was not good. If I was a student then, I could be a teaching assistant and do various things and do research on electric vehicle technologiesthat was my default planbut I also thought that if I did a PhD at Stanford then I would spend several years watching the Internet go through this incredibly rapid growth phase and that would be really difficult to handleso I really wanted to be doing something. It really seemed like things were going to take off, although nobody had made any money in Internet at the time. In '95, really, no-one was making any money in the Internet. In fact, even on Sand Hill Road people were like, what's the Internet? Amazingly, when we tried to get funding for a company in, I think it was, November of '95, more than half of the venture capitalists did not know what the Internet was and had not used it. Yeah, they'd literally ask, isn't that something that the government and universities use? And I'd be like, uhh, for now.But then, Netscape went public in late 1995, I think it was, and then after that even a lot venture capitalists still didn't understand it, and still hadn't used it. Somebody had made money on it, so the second time we went to get funding, everyone was interested.  That's right. Funny name. We were just incredibly stupid at the time, I think. That's the main reason for that name. We thought, we don't know anything about names, so we'll get some ad agencies to suggest a bunch of options and then Zip2, seemed kind of speedy. I don't know why the hell we chose that stupid name, and it has a digit in it. Why would you choseit could be ZipTo, it could be ZipTwo, it could be ZipToo, so people literally spelt the name every variationwhich is bad if you've got a url and you don't have the other ones. Zip2 started off as, basically, like I said, we're trying to figure out how to make enough money to exist as a company and so, as there wasn't really any advertising money being made, we thought we could help existing companies get onlinebring their stuff onlineso we developed software that helped bring a lot of the newspapers and media companies online. A lot of them just didn't know what the Internet was and even the ones that were aware of the Internet didn't have a software team, so they weren't very good at developing functionality. We had as investors and customers: The New York Times company, Nightrider, Herst, and so we were able to get them to pay us to develop software for them to bring them online publishing stuff. We did maps and directions and yellow pages and white pages and various other things. We developed quite sophisticated technology, actually, but it wasn't actually being employed super well by the media companies. We would suggest ways to use it and then it would not be used as effectively as it could be. It was very frustrating. That's right. Compaq had Altavista, so their thought was to combine Altavista and a bunch of other technology companies and see if that would work, which it did not. None the less, they were pretty nice guys and bought the company and that gave me the capital to do another company. I wanted to do another company with Internet because I thought we hadn't really reached the potential that we could have with Zip2. We had really sophisticated software.. our software was at least comparable to what Yahoo or Excite or others had. In fact, I thought in some ways it was better, but because it was all filtered through these partners it wasn't getting properly used. So I thought, I want to do something that can be a more significant contribution to the Internet and so the initial thought was financial services because money is digital, it's low bandwidth, at the time there wasyou know, most people were on slow modems, because this was late '98, early '99. Yeah, it worked out better than we expected. Initially, Confinity and X.com started out from slightly different directions and converged to the same point. With X, the thought was to create an integrated set of financial services, so you could go to one place and do any financial thing and then, as a feature, we had the ability to transfer money or securities or anything, simply by entering a unique identifierso, like, an email address or a phone number or something like thatbut when we'd demo the system, the hard stuffwhich was the integration of all the financial servicespeople would not be interested in, but they'd be real interested in being able to transfer money using an email address. That was actually quite easy, and so we focused our energy on that. Although it's easy in principle, what gets really hard is adding security while still keeping it easy to use. It's like the Willy Loman quote, why do you rob banks, because that's where the money is. Why do people rob Paypal? Same reason. You can dial up the security to a really high level but then you're going to make it very hard to use. That was one of the toughest things we wrestled with. Then, Confinity originally started as software for Palm Pilots and they had a demonstration application with the ability to beam money from one Palm Pilot to another using the infrared port. Yeah, if people remember that one. That was big at one point. They had a website, sort of parallel to that, wherebecause, once you'd beamed the infrared tokens you had to still then synchronize your Palm Pilot and do the transfer via the website. Then people weren't so interested in the Palm Pilot stuff, but they were interested in the website, so we kind of converged to the same point, and were quite close together so we decided to merge the companies and, in, I think, January or so 2000it was a very turbulent period. The growth in the company was pretty crazy. At the end of the first 4 or 5 weeks, we had 100,000 customers. We definitely did not, and it wasn't all good because we had some bugs in the software and, ya know, even if the bug only occurs 1 in 1000 times, it's still 100 very angry customerswhere's my money? That would be a reasonable concern that people would have. We had customer service on University Avenue in Palo Alto. There were five people. So, when something went wrong, customer service phones would basically explode. We had many challenges and then the various financial regulatory agencies were trying to shut us down. Visa and Mastercard were trying to shut us down. E-bay was trying to shut us down. FTC was trying to shut us down. There were a lot of battles there. It was a close call. We definitely became very close to dying there in 2000 and 2001. I think we had a really talented group of people at Paypal and a lot of people have actually gone on to start many other companiesYoutube, Linked-In, Yelp, Yammer, it's quite a long list actually. No, not really. I did take a bit of time off. I did reasonably well from Paypal. I was the largest shareholder in the company and we were acquired for about a billion and a half in stock and then the stock doubled. So yeah, I did reasonably well, but the idea of lying on a beach as my main thing, just sounds like the worstit sounds horrible to me. I would go bonkers. I would have to be on serious drugs. I'd be super-duper bored. I like high intensityI mean, I like going to the beach for a short period of time, but not much longer than a few days or something like that. When I was thinking about what would affect the world, as a student, it wasn't really from the standpoint of those are the things I'll get involved init was kinda more in the abstract, of these are the things that I think will happen that will affect the world, but not that I will be involved in them. As it turns out I have, but I always thought that we would make much more progress in space, and it just didn't happen. It's really disappointing. I was really quite bothered by it. When we went to the Moon, we were supposed to have a base on the Moon. We were supposed to send people to Mars, and that stuff, it just didn't happen. It's as if we went backwards. We got the Space Shuttle but the Space Shuttle could only go to low Earth orbit, whereas a Saturn V could go to the Moon. Now the Space Shuttle's gone and so, that just seemed like a really bad thing. So I thought, well, maybe it was a question of there not being enough attention or will to do this, but this was a wrong assumption, but that's the reason for the greenhouse idea.. the thought was, if there could be a small philanthropic mission to Mars.. so, I was expecting to lose all the money that I invested in that.. but if we could send a small greenhouse to the surface of Mars will seeds in dehydrated nutrient gel to be hydrated upon landing, you'd have this great shot of a little greenhouse with little green plants on a red background. I thought that would get people excited. You've gotta sort of imagine the money shot, if you will. So yeah, I think green plants on red background would be not bad, and people tend to get interested and excited about precedents and superlatives. So this would be the furtherest that life's ever traveled, the first life on Mars, as far as we know, and I thought, well, maybe that would result in a bigger budget for NASA and then we could resume the journey. That was the basic idea. I spent several months on this, actually, and went to Russia, three times. I was able to figure out how to get the cost of the spacecraft low and the communications and the greenhouse and all that, down to a reasonable numberreasonable meaning several million dollars. Yeah, I hope we've got that somewhere. I mean, I'm sure it looks pretty goofy in retrospect, but that's the idea that we had and I spent several hundred thousand dollars getting the design worked out and engaging some companies to come up with the design specifications for the subsystems. Then it came to buying the rocket and the problem was that the cost of the rocket was really high. The lowest cost rocket in the US at the time was Boeing's Delta II and that would have been about $50M and you'd still need to have an upper stage for Mars, so probably like $60M all-in, and I wanted to do two of these missions because I thought if I did just one, and it didn't work, then that could have the opposite effectlook how dumb it is to try to send something to Mars. What an idiot. So I wanted to do two and I just didn't have enough money to do two complete missions.  Well, I was hoping it would be less than that, but not more than thatabout roughly on that order would be the most thatI couldn't spend much more than that. I had three quite interesting trips to Russia to try to negotiate purchase of two Russian ICBMs.  They just thought I was crazy, but that's not good either if you're buying ICBMs. Minus the nuke, I think that would have been a lot more. I slightly got the feeling that that was on the table, which is very alarming, but yeah, those were very weird meetings with the Russian military and what-not. I think they thought that I was a bit crazy but then they read about Paypal so they thought, okay, he's crazy but he's got money, so importantly I could pay on-time. Remarkably capitalist, was my impression. I came to the conclusion that my initial premise was wrong. In fact, there's a great deal of will, there's not such a shortage, but people don't think there's a way. If people thought there was a way, or at least something that wouldn't break the federal budget, then people would support it. Which, in retrospect, I think is actually kind of obvious because the United States is a distillation of the human spirit of exploration. People came here from other places. There's no nation which is more a nation of explorers than the United States, but people need to believe that it's possible and they're not going to have to give up something like healthcare or something that's important. That's important. So, I thought, well then, it's not a question of will, it's a question of showing that there's a way and I started reading quite a bit about rockets to try to understand why they're so friggin' expensive. Where does the $60M go for the Delta II and now I think a Delta II is now $100M or something even, some crazy number, and that's a relatively small rocket. So if you go to one of the bigger rockets it's nearer from $200M to $400M. Anyway, I came to the conclusion that there wasn't really a good reason for rockets to be so expensive, and they could be a lot less. Even in expendable format they could be less and if one could make them reusable, like airplanes, then the cost of rocketry would drop dramaticallycost of space travel would drop dramatically. The cost of the fuel was maybe anywhere from 0.2% to 0.5% of the cost of the rocket. It's kind of like a plane. How much is the cost of the fuel in the plane vs the cost of the plane itself? It's at least a two order of magnitude difference. But nobody had really been able to make a reusable rocket work. So I thought that, okay, if we can do that, then that would really be the key breakthrough for space travel. So far we have not succeeded, I should point out. I think failure is bad. I don't think it's good, but if something is important enough then you do it even though the risk of failure is high. My advice, if someone wants to start a company, is they should bare in mind that the most likely outcome is that it's not going to work and they should reconcile themselves to that strong possibility. They should only do it if they feel that they are really compelled to do it. The way starting a company works is, usually at the very beginning it's kind of fun and then it's really hellish for a number of years. Yeah, there's a friend of mine who's a successful entrepreneur and started his career around the same time as I did and he has a good phrasehis name's Billyhe said, yeah, starting a company is like eating glass and staring into the abyss. That's generally true, and if you don't eat the glass, you're not going to be successful. Like I said, my interest in electric vehicles goes back a long timegoes back 20 plus years. In fact, the original reason I came to Silicon Valley was work on electric vehicle energy storage technology. I thought that big car companies would develop electric cars because obviously it's the right move, and I thought that was vindicated when General Motors was doing their EV-1 and Toyota did the electric Rav-4, the original one, and they made those announcements and then brought those to market. I thought, okay, this is great, we're going to have electric cars. GM is obviously going to do the EV-2 and 3 and they'll just keep getting better and everything will be cool. When California relaxed its regulations on electric cars, GM recalled all the of the EV-1s and crushed them into little cubes, which seemed kind of nutty. In fact, the people didn't want their EV-1s recalled. They tried court orders to stop the cars from being recalled. They held a candle lit vigil, okay, at the yard where the cars were crushed. I did not attend, but I was moved by it. It's crazyI mean, when was the last time you heard about any company's customers holding a candle lit vigil for the demise of that product. Particularly a GM product. I mean, what bigger wake-up call do you need? It's like, hello, the customers are really upset about this. They'd really prefer it if it didn't get recalled. That kind of blew my mind. So I was like wow, okay. Then we had the advent of lithium-ion batteries which reallythat's one of the key things to making electric cars workand still nothing.So, in 2003, I had lunch with one of the other co-founders of the company, Jeffrey Straubel who was actually working on, I think, a hydrogen airplane or something, and he mentioned to me the T-Zero car that was done by AC Propulsion. They had some of the guys, I think, who had been on the EV-1 program and they took a gasoline sports car, kind of a kit car, and outfitted it with lithium-ion batteries, sort of consumer grade cells, and they created a car which was essentially the precursor of the Roadster. In fact, it had very similar specifications: sub-four second 0 to 60 miles per hour, 250 mile range, and also two seater sports car, but it was quite primitive. It didn't have a roof, for one thing, at all. In fact, I don't know if it had doors. It didn't have any safety systems, no airbags, it wasn't homologatedso you couldn't sell it. So, in order to create a commercial version of the car, something we could actually produce and sell to people, there was a fair bit of work that was required. I kept trying to get AC Propulsion to commercialize the T-Zero and I said, look, I'll fund the whole effort, you really need to do this, and they just sort of refused to do it. They didn't want to do it. They wanted to make like an electric Scion. Which, in principle sounds good, but it would have cost $75,000 and no-one wants to buy a $75,000 Scion. The technology was just not readythere was just no way to make a good value-for-money proposition with something like a Scion. Well, I really didn't want to be CEO of two companies. I tried really hard not to be, actually. Ac Propulsion finally said okay. I actually told AC Propulsion, look, if you're not going to do this, I'm going to create a company to do this and they said, well, there's some other guys who are also interested in doing that, and you guys should combine efforts and create a company and that's basically how Tesla came together. Then we had a lot of drama. Since I provided, like, 95% of the money I could have been the CEO from day one, but the idea of being CEO of two startups at the same time was not appealing and shouldn't be appealing, btw, if anyone is thinking that's a good idea. It's a really terrible idea. If you're going to have an epiphany to start a company, it'll probably be a Burning Man. Solar City is part of the whole sustainable energy thing. You have to have sustainable means of producing and consuming energy. So, even if you have electric cars, you have to have the other side of the equation. So, how do you produce energy in a sustainable way and I think solar is the primary means of sustainable energy generation. In fact, the Earth is almost entirely solar powered today. The only reason we're not a frozen ice ball at 3 degrees Kelvin is because of the sun. The sun is responsible for all precipitation. It's responsible for the vast majority of the ecosystem, apart from chemotrobes at the bottom of the ocean. So, there's just a tiny amount of energy that people consume to power civilization. It's actually a very tiny amount of energy relative to the amount of energy that the sun sends in our general direction. To deal with that, we could, in fact, power the entire world with solar power. Quite easily. Oh no, I knew that long ago. I knew that in college. I wouldn't say it was a particular epiphany, it was more that I was at Burning Man with two of my cousins, Lyndon and Peter Rive who are awesome guys, and they were trying to think what should they do after their first startup. They did a company called Everydream which did large scale management of computers. If you're got like 60,000 computers it's kind of hard to manage them, so they created software that allows companies to do that. That company actually got sold to Dell. I wouldn't say they were looking for new ideas. I was actually trying to convince them that they should do solar because I just thought it was an area that needed people like themreally good entrepreneursand since I was somewhat over-committed, I thought, well look, if you guys will do a solar company, I'll provide all the funding and whatever guidance or help I can provide. I'd do that. I thought it was really important that there'd be good entrepreneurs like them in solar because it just wasn't doing very well as an industry. I thought people weren't focusing on the right problem. Everybody thought that the panel was the problem but actuallyit's a problem, but it's not the most important problem. The panel is somewhat commoditized at this point. Making standard efficiency solar panels is about as hard as making dry wall. It's really easy. In fact, I'd say dry wall's probably harder. What is a thorny problem is trying to figure out how to get solar on tens of thousands, eventually hundreds of thousands, of rooftops. It's kind of like you've got to re-roof millions of buildings and then figure out how the grid interconnects work and then manage all those systems. If you've got hundreds of thousands or maybe millions of systems, eventually, you've got to manage all these distributed systems. You've got this really complex distributed utility, essentially. Which I think actually plays to their prior strength in creating really scalable software for managing hundreds of thousands of computers in a distributed fashion. That's kinda what they did and an awesome job. I'd basically show up at the board meetings to hear, what's the good news this time? We had, like, maybe a few bad board meetingswell, late 2008 there was some bad board meetings but, for the most part, apart from a few times when the macroeconomic conditions were really terrible, they just did an amazing job with almost no help from me. Yeah, they deserve the vast majority of the credit for the success of that company. No, I don't agree with that. I don't think that's true. I think we've seenand I'm not sure over what time period this is, exactlybut we've seen huge improvements in the Internet and new things. In recent years, Twitter and Facebook being pretty huge when people kinda thought the Internet was done. I think some of the things that we're doing, like electric cars, are a new thing. I do think there's some pretty significant breakthroughs. In genomics we're getting better and better at decoding genomes and being able to write generics. That's going to be a huge huge area. I think there's likely to be some breakthroughs in artificial intelligence. I suspect we will even see the flying car.  Yeah. I think someone else is doing that. Well sometimes the governmentI don't think the government intends to stand in the way of innovation but sometimes it can over-regulate industries to the point where innovation becomes very difficult. I mean, the car industry used to be a great hotbed of innovation, at the beginning of the 20th century, but now there's so many regulations that are meant to protect consumers. The body of regulations for cars could fill this room, it's just crazy how much regulation there is. Down to what the headlamps are supposed to be like. They even specify the elements of the user interface on the dashboard, and some of these are completely anachronistic because they're relating back to the days when you had like a little light that would illuminate an image. We have to reserve space on the instrument panel on the Model-S for where all the indicators that a car would havelike, you have these little lights, all these little things, there's a whole bunch of them, and we can't have anything else in that space. Well, how about if we have one space and render a different graphic? Oh no, because people are expecting to see it in that space. I'm like, nobody is expecting to see it in that space.  Well, you can argue with them, but not with great success. You can actually get these things changed but it takes ages. One of the things we're trying to get islike, why should you have side mirrors if you can have say, little tiny video cameras and have them display an image inside the car? But there are all these regulations saying that you have to have side mirrors. I went and met with the secretary of transport, like, can you change this regulation? Still nothing has happened. That was like two years ago. It's not easy to get these regulations changed. Well, I think, actually, I think the reality of being President is that you're actually the captain of a very huge ship and have a very small rudder. Obviously, if there was a button that a President could press that said economic prosperity, he'd be hitting that button real fast. You could measure the speed of light by how fast they press that button, because that's called the reelection button. So I'm not sure how much the President can really do, but you know, I'm generally a fan of minimal government interference in the economy. The government should be like, the referee but not like, the player, and there shouldn't be too many referees. There is an exception which is when there's an unpriced externality, such as the CO2 capacity of the oceans and atmosphere. When you have an unpriced externality then the normal market mechanisms do not work and then it's government role to intervene in a way that's sensible, and the best way to intervene is to assign a proper price to whatever the common good is that's being consumed. There should be a tax on carbon. You know, if the bad thing is carbon accumulation in the atmosphere then there needs to be a tax on that. Then you can get rid of all subsidies and everything else. It seems logical that you should tax things that are most likely to be bad rather thanlike, that's why we tax cigarettes and alcohol, because those are probably bad for you. Certainly cigarettes are. So, you want to err on the side of taxing things that are probably bad and not tax things that are good. So I think, given that there is a need to gather tax to pay for the federal government, we should shift the tax burden to bad things and then adjust that tax on the bad things according to whatever is going to result in the behavior that we think is beneficial for the future. I think currently, what we're doing right now, which is mining and burning trillions of tons of hydrocarbons, that used to be buried very deep underground and now we're sinking them into the atmosphere and running this chemical experiment on the atmosphere and then you've got the oil and gas companies which have ungodly amounts of money and you can't expect them to just roll over and die. Like, they don't do that. Actually, what they'd much prefer to do is spend enormous amounts of money lobbying and running bogus ad campaigns and that sort of thing, to preserve their situation. It's a lot like tobacco companies in the old days. I mean, they used to run these ads with doctors, or like a guy pretending he's a doctor, essentially implying that smoking is good for you and like, having pregnant mothers on ads smoking. As far as climate change skeptics, I believe in the scientific method and one should have a healthy skepticism of things in general and first thing from a scientific standpoint is that you always look at things probabilistically, not definitively, and so, a lot of times, if someone is a skeptic in the scientific community what they’re really saying is that they’re not sure that it’s 100% certain that this is the case, but that’s not the point. The point is to look at it from the other side. What do you think the percentage chance is of this being catastrophic for some meaningful percentage of the Earth’s population? Is it greater than 1%? Is it even 1%? If it is even 1%, why are we running this experiment? We’re playing Russian roulette and as each year goes by we’re loading more rounds in the chamber. It’s not wise. What makes it super insane is that we’re going to run out of oil anyway. It’s not like there’s some infinite oil supply. We’re going to run out it. So we know, we have to get to a sustainable means of transportation, no matter what, so why even run the experiment? It’s the world’s dumbest experiment. Well, he’s certainly someone I’ve admired. Although I did try to talk to him once at a party and he was super rude to me, but I don’t think it was me. I think it was, sort of, you know I’m not the first. I was actually thereya know, Larry Page is an old friend of mine. I’ve known Larry since before he got venture funding for Google, and Larry was the guy that introduced me to Steve Jobs. So it’s not as like I’m going tugging on his coat like, ya know, please talk to me. Being introduced by Larry Page is not bad. Obviously he was an incredible guy and made fantastic products that, ya know, I don’t know. There was a certainthe guy had a certain magic about him. That was really inspiring. I think that’s really great. I think Steve Jobs was way cooler than I am. It’s somewhat cliche, but it happens a lot in the shower. I don’t know what it is about showers orget the camera. No, I do, I just sort of stand there in the shower and I do actually. Sounds wrong but yeah, I do. Not to mention the Burning Man epiphanies. Those are huge. There are sometimes, like, late at night, if I’ve been thinking about something and I can’t sleep, I’ll be up for several hours pacing around the house thinking about things. Occasionally I’ll sketch something or send myself an email or something like that. I don’t have a mentor per se but I try to get feedback from as many people as possible. I have, like, friends and I ask them what they think about this, that, or the other. Larry Page a good friend of mine. I value his advice a lot. I have many other good friends and so I think it’s good to solicit feedback and particularly negative feedback, actually. Obviously, people don’t love the idea of giving you negative feedback unless it’s on blogs, they do that.  Yeah, that was weird. That was kind of troubling because growing up Neil Armstrong was kind of a hero. Like, it kind of sucks. That’s a bit of a blow, but I think in his case he was somewhat manipulated by other interests. I don’t think he quite new what he was saying in those congressional hearings. Well, if you think about a company, a company is a group of people that are organized to create a product or service. That’s what a company is. So, in order to create such a thing, you have to convince others to join you in your effort and so they have to be convinced that it’s a sensible thing, that there’s at least some reasonable chance of success, and that if there is success the reward will be commensurate with the effort involved. I think getting people to believe in what you’re doing, and you, is important. In the beginning, there will be few people who believe in you, or what you’re doing, but then over time, as you make progress, the evidence will build and more and more people will believe in what you’re doing. I think it’s a good idea, when creating a company, to have a demonstration or, if it’s a product, to have like a good mockup, or even if it’s software to have good demo ware or to be able to sketch something, so people can really envision what it’s about. Try to get to that point as soon as possible and then iterate to make it as real as possible as fast as possible, if that makes sense. Sometimes not enough. Sleep is really great because I find if I don’t get enough sleep then I’m quite grumpy. I mean, obviously, I think most people are that way. I try to figure out what’s the right amount of sleep, because I found I could drop below a certain threshold of sleep and although I could be awake more hours, and I could sustain it, I would get less done because my mental acuity would be affected. So, I found, generally, the right number for me is around six to six and half hours, on average, per night. That is an average though.  Having a smartphone is incredibly helpful because that means you can do email during inter-social periodsyou’re in a car, in the bathroom, walking everywhere. You can do email, practically, whenever you’re awake. That’s really helpful, to have email for SpaceX and Tesla integrated on my phone. Then you have to apply a lot of hours to actual working. The way I generally do it is I’ll be working at SpaceX on Monday and then Monday night fly to the bay area. Then Tuesday and Wednesday at the bay area, at Tesla and then fly back on Wednesday night and then Thursday and Friday at SpaceX. In the last several months I would fly back here on Saturday and either spend Saturday and Sunday at Tesla or spend Saturday at Tesla and Sunday at SpaceX. I do drag them along on a lot of things, actually. They’re remarkably unimpressedI wish they were sort of more interested. The twins are 8 and the triplets are 6, so maybe they’ll get more interested later.  Well, I think if they’re inclined to.. I mean, if they’re really interested in working at Tesla or SpaceX then I’d help them do that. I’m not sure I’d want to, necessarily, try to insert them into the CEO role at some point, ya know. It’s sort of like, if the rest of the team and the board felt that they were the right person then that would be fine but I wouldn’t like people to fell like I’d installed my kid there. I don’t think that’d be good for either the companies or the kid, really. I was, at one point, of the school of thought that it’s best to give away 99% of one’s assetskind of like the Buffet school of thoughtI’m still mostly inclined in that direction, but after seeing what happened with Ford and GM and Chrysler where GM and Chrysler went bankrupt but Ford did not, and Ford seemed to make better long term choices than the other two companies, and that’s in-part because of the influence of the Ford family, and I thought, well, maybe there is some merit in having some longer term family ownership. At least a portion of it, so it acts as a positive influence. I mean, this is something I’m still thinking about, but acting as a positive influence in the long term, so the company does proper long term things. Look at what happened, also, in Silicon Valley with HP and I think it’s quite sad, and that is to some degree because there was much diminished influence by the Hewett and Packard families. I think they should have prevailed when they were opposed to the merger that took place at one point and I think they were right, actually. No, there’s no IPO planned. Running a public company does have it’s drawbacks. In the case of Tesla and Solar City, we had to raise capital and we had kind of a complex equity structure that needed to be resolved by going public and I thought we kinda needed to do that in those two cases. We don’t have to do that at SpaceX. I think there’s a good chance that we will at some point in the future, but SpaceX’s objectives are super long term and the market is not. So, I’m a bit worried that if we did go public too soon that market pressure would force us to do short term things and abandon long term projects. Going to Mars is very long term. I did promise that I’d do some paper on the Hyperloop idea and things got a little hectic towards the end of last year because I committed to make these milestones at Tesla to the public markets and I had to stay true to the obligation which required just an insane level of work and attention, and we also had the Solar City IPO which was a very difficult IPO to get done and that IPO occurred just by the skin of it’s teeth. It was such a tough one. If it wasn’t in December, it would mean pushing it out quite a bit, and the problem was that we’d already pushed it out quite a bit already. If we didn’t go public we’d have to go a private round and then the whole thing just wouldn’t feel right. It’s like you’re sitting at the altar and you don’t do the weddingit’s a bit awkward, ya know. So, we really needed to do it and I think if we hadn’t done it, people would have looked at it as a failure and it wouldn’t have been good because there’s just been too many failures in the solaror not enough successes today in the solar arena. We need to chalk up a success.  Yes, ironically, the solar industry does not have a lot of that. Actually, I was asked by a journalist, ‘Do you want to die on Mars?’ and I said ‘Yes’ and I was like, but wait, not on impact, just to be clear. That’s one of the possibilities. I guess I’d like to be able to go to Mars while I’m still able to manage the journey reasonably well. So I think I don’t want to be like 75 and go to Mars. At least in the beginning, it could be mildly arduous, so I’d like to get there ideally in my 50s, that would be kind of cool. I aspire to make that happen, and I can see the potential for that happening and I’m not saying it will happen but I think it can happen. I’ll try to make it happen.It was a good day. We accomplished all of our primary mission objectives: satellites were deployed successfully, our client/customers already receiving data from their satellites, in this case Cassiope. It was really a great day. We demonstrated a lot of new technology successfully including the Merlin 1-D engine, the new stage separation system, the much taller rocket which structurally performed very well, the 17 foot diameter fairing which separated successfully, no problems there. Overall, really great. There were a couple of optional things we were trying to do which were relight of the upper stage and of the boost stage. In the case of the upper stage relight, we initiated relight and the system encountered an anomaly and did not complete the relight. We believe we understand what that issue is and should have it addressed in time for the next flight of Falcon 9. Other than that, the ascent phase was excellent. That final burn was actually just a sideways burn, just to check propellant residuals.Going to the boost stage, the boost stage actually initiated two burns. One was lighting three engines, doing a supersonic retro-propulsion. I believe the first time that any rocket stage has attempted to do a supersonic retro-propulsion. It lit 3 of the 9 engines and completed that maneuver well. Came back through atmospheric re-entry and survived coming back into the atmosphere without a problem. Previously our first stages always essentially exploded upon re-entering the atmosphere due to the extreme forces they encounter. As a result of the retro burn, we made it through. We controlled the stage with a fair bit of precision to a landing point with the center engine burn. That relight also went really well.However, we exceeded the roll control authority of the attitude control thrusters. So in this case, the boost stage did not have landing gear which helps to essentially stabilize the stage like fins on an aircraft or empennage section on an aircraft. The stage actually ended up spinning to a degree that was greater than we could control with the gas thrusters and it centrifuged the propellant. It caused the boost stage to run out of propellant because of the centrifuging effect before hitting the water. It hit the water relatively hard. We recovered portions of the stage. The most important thing is that we now believe we have all the pieces of the puzzle. If you take the Grasshopper tests, where we were able to do a precision takeoff and landing of a Falcon 9 first stage and you combine it with the results from this flight where we were able to successfully transition from vacuum to hypersonic, through supersonic, through transonic and light the engines all the way through and control the stage all the way through. We have all the pieces necessary to achieve a full recovery of the boost stage. We are really excited about that. I think that we will achieve that next year. That's what actually got me the most excited about this flight. I think that now I have all of the pieces of the puzzle necessary to achieve full and rapid reusability of the Falcon 9 boost stage. Before deciding what the issue was, I think we want to have a bit more time to read the data, before coming to a conclusion. We essentially saw the engine initiate ignition get up to about 400 psi and then it encountered a condition that it didn't like. It may have been due to an extended spin start, maybe, but this is speculative. So it initiated an abort of the restart. But we have all of the data from the restart. So I am confident that we will be able to sort it out and address it before the next flight. It's nothing fundamental. On the test stand, we have restarted the Merlin 1-D engine in some cases dozens of times. We just have to iron out some slight differences of it operating in vacuum. Yeah, absolutely. The ascent burns, basically the first stage burn and the second stage burn were all full duration and those actually went likely slightly better than expected. The second stage hit its target velocity vector a few seconds early which means that the stage was actually performing a little better than expected, probably higher specific impulse than anticipated. So the only anomalies that we are aware of thus far are the second stage restart where we turn the stage sideways and we are going to do a propellant depletion burn and the third firing of the first stage when it centrifuged the propellant just before hitting the ocean. It actually went better than expected. It was incredibly smooth. The ascent was picture perfect. I stood outside watching it, in full, just before stage separation and such an incredibly clear day too if you were watching it first hand. You could actually see the whole rocket go to space, I mean literally exit the atmosphere. When you looked at the smoke trail, it's more like a water trail actually, you can see where the atmosphere ends because the engine keeps firing in the same way and then suddenly the water vapor trail ends and that's where the atmosphere ends. Well, it doesn't end but it transitions to ratified gas. Florida's hazy and you can't see what's going on. This was ultra-clear. I'll give you some numbers but I would just check them with my team before saying that there are definitely accurate. I think that we are at 327km perigee and 1495km apogee. But let's just double check that before, because I'm kind of just quoting off the cuff here. We effectively lose, in terms of performance... It really depends on what we want to do with the stage if we were to do an ocean landing or a return to launch site landing. If we do an ocean landing, the performance hit is actually quite small at maybe in the order of 15%. If we do a return to launch site landing, it's probably double that, it's more like a 30% hit i.e., 30% of payload lost. We believe we're on track to launch SES next month. There might be a few extra weeks just to make sure that we are confident about the second stage restart. From a hardware stand point, we are ready to go with SES next month. And then with a steady cadence of vehicles thereafter. The SES rocket, the Falcon 9 rocket that will launch SES, is actually at Cape Canaveral in the hangar right now. It's the first time that we have actually had rockets at both launch sites in SpaceX history. It's also actually the first time that we had both stages firing at the same time. We had the upper stage continuing its orbit burn and then the first stage doing a re-entry burn.As far as the safety aspect of the return to launch site of the first stage that's part of why we want to do it first in the ocean just to make sure that things will be fine. For any landing area that we would have, the landing ellipse, the sort of error that the stage could encounter would be an unpopulated region. So we would aim to have a landing site that's unpopulated with a radius of a couple of miles which can be achieved in Cape Canaveral and Vandenberg. It's rare to do a deorbit burn of the upper stage, that's unusual in the rocket world, but we probably would have the ability to do that in some cases. For low Earth orbit missions the stage would encounter a small amount of atmospheric drag and eventually reenter and burn up. For the commercial missions to geostationary orbit we do a shorter coast than what we just did but we coast for a little bit and then restart once you get close to the equator. In that scenario, restart is important for those missions. We can technically do them without a restart, we can do them as a single burn, but it means the satellite has to do more work to change the plane of its orbit to equatorial. So we can do it either way, but the one which is the minimum work for the satellite does require restart. But, as I mentioned, we've restarted the Merlin, we've taken a single Merlin engine and restarted it literally dozens of times, so it's not a question of can this engine restart, we just need to iron out what were the differences between restarting in vacuum and microgravity verses restarting on the ground. The next two launches, we are going to gather data from the first stage but we are not going to attempt to recover it because we committed to give the customers on the next two flights maximum performance of the rocket. When we first saw these flights, we didn't reserve enough performance to recover the first stage. So we don't expect to recover the first stage the next two flights but we do expect to get good re-entry data again. The next recovery attempt for the first stage will be the fourth flight of this version, so three flights from now. We have two geostationary flights: SES and Thaicom and then we have got the orbital resupply mission for NASA, the CRS flight and it's on that CRS flight that we are going to try to bring the first stage back. We are hoping to put the landing legs on that stage. It's still debatable whether at that stage, we will land with landing legs in the ocean or land with landing legs on land. Either way, we do want it to have the landing legs on. The most revolutionary thing about the new Falcon 9 is the potential ability to recover the boost stage which is almost three-quarters of the cost of the rocket. That's the most important thing about it. There are other improvements we have made to increase design reliability. For example, with stage separation, we have gone from nine attach pinnings and three pistons to just three pistons with integrated attach pinnings. So it goes from twelve failure points down to just three on the stage separation. I think that's an improvement in reliability. It was also the first time that we were flying the 17 foot diameter fairing. So proving that that fairing works is very important for our satellite customers. That fairing is capable of taking the biggest satellites in the world.And then of course, we proved out the Merlin 1D engine and having a much sort of longer rocket which has more complicated bending modes and making sure that the control system can deal with all of that. So we accomplished a lot today. I am really happy about the results. We have a little bit of work to do obviously. But all in all I think that it's been a great day. Yes that’s the plan i.e., to have landing legs. We are not going hold up that flight for landing legs. So if landing legs end up being delayed for any reason then we won’t hold up the flight for that. But the full plan is to have landing legs on that mission. The schedule for that mission is mostly governed by upgrades to the Dragon spacecraft. We have an upgraded avionics system and we are able to provide a lot more power to NASA for powered cargo. It essentially triples, I think, the amount of powered cargo that NASA can have. So I think that’s what is driving that schedule. It’s a high priority for us to get that mission launched as soon as we can. It looks like probably sometime in February most likely. We have actually been working with Air Force range safety and the FAA to identify landing locations at Cape Canaveral and we have identified a few. I don’t think that we are quite ready to say what those locations are but they are kind of out on the tip of Cape Canaveral, on the eastern most tip of Cape Canaveral. It’s great working with both Air Force range safety and the FAA. They have actually been quite supportive of the whole thing. You need a FAA license and we expect to get it. We actually do have some great video of the re-entry. It’s coming back. It’s actually on the boat or boats, I should say. So we don’t have that. We should be able to post that maybe that later this week. There’s some pretty cool video. In terms of components, I think we have… Bear in mind this is coming from: there is a fast boat and then there is a bigger slow boat and then it goes to mission control and then to me. There is like four levels of broken tails going on here. Take this with a grain of salt. But the latest I heard is that they were able to recover the inter-stage, a number of the components from the engine bay, and some of the composite overwrap pressure vessels. That’s all I know at this point. There may be more. I think that the most important thing that being able to launch from Vandenberg and the Cape gives us is the ability to reach any orbit. So we can go to any inclination at this point and for mid-inclination missions as you mention, like going to the space station orbit, we could conceivably do space station missions from either the Cape or Vandenberg. Our default plan is to that from the Cape. But if there was, let’s say some terrible storm at the Cape, a force 5 hurricane or something, that damaged the Cape launch facilities, we could in an emergency transition to launching and re-supplying the space station from Vandenberg. I think that it’s good to have that optionality. We are continuing forward with a third launch site which is likely to be Texas but we are still waiting for all of the final approvals. Within the Cape, we are going to be expanding our activities and hopefully, you know once this sort of silliness around Pad 39A is resolved chuckles, hopefully, we will be able to have two launch pads at the Cape. That will enable us to focus our Air Force and intelligence missions on Pad 40 and kind of civil space missions for NASA cargo resupply, astronauts transport and science missions from Pad 39A. Hopefully, that’s what happens there. It i.e. the Falcon 9 version 1.1 definitely informs the Heavy development. The Falcon Heavy is essentially the Falcon 9 with two additional boost stages as strap on boosters. So it’s the same engines that we use, very similar airframe, the airframe will be slightly optimized because of the fact that it is a side booster but the avionics will be the same as the Falcon 9 first stage. How we control the whole thing will be very very similar. Hopefully, once the three boost stages separate, they will come back and land individually and they will behave just like the Falcon 9 boost stage. All three of them will come back hopefully and land on three separate pads and we’ll join them back together for a future flight and launch them. We are expecting to complete the SES and Thaicom missions in the next 2 to 3 months. SES hopefully in about a month and then Thaicom, a month or two after that and then the NASA CRS launch which is when we would hopefully have the landing legs on by early next year. In terms of Falcon Heavy testing, we are just finishing the Falcon Heavy test stand at McGregor and putting the final touches on that. One thing that I should mention is that even though Falcon Heavy will be three times the thrust of Falcon 9, it will actually probably be quieter for people in Waco or in surrounding areas because the Falcon 9 test stand is up on a tall tripod whereas the Falcon Heavy stand is buried in the ground. It sort of goes down. So there will probably be less sound transmitted even though it’s three times the thrust. That will be a very exciting test firing to watch and we are hopefully going to have one of those done, I am guessing, in the second quarter next year. Actually, the launch site looks like it’s in great shape with the exception of some air conditioning ducts that clearly need to be replaced. The fairing air condition ducts got zapped but the strong back and the erector and the stand itself look like they’re in great shape. We’ll improve the robustness of the air conditioning lines and we’ll obviously do a complete checkup to see, you know, is there is anything else that requires additional heat shielding or blast shielding of some kind. Just looking at the video, it looks pretty good. I’m not sure when our next flight is from Vandenberg, I’ve been so focused on this flight that I haven’t been paying much attention to anything that isn’t super-near term. It’s certainly a huge relief to have successfully delivered CASSIOPE to orbit. It’s been weighing on me quite heavily. I’d have to look at our manifest. Sorry, my apologies for not having that information. Our goal is to recover the first stage on all CRS flights and really on most flights. The next two flights are somewhat of an exception. When we negotiated these deals, we didn’t have much bargaining power. It was before we obviously flown this version of the Falcon 9 successfully. So we kind of agreed to give up all performance on the rocket and not reserve anything for reusability. But going into the future, with future contracts, with a few exceptions, we have reserved enough performance to recover the stage. It’s not just the CRS flights, it should be most flights after these next two flights. In terms when we actually re-fly the stage, it’s going to depend on what condition the stage is in and obviously getting customers comfortable with that. So it’s difficult to say when would actually re-fly it. If things go super well then we would be able to re-fly a Falcon 9 stage before the end of next year and that’s our aspiration. We’re getting a little off topic but I’ll answer this question. I don’t want to go too much into the crew Dragon, or Dragon version 2. We’ll definitely do a press event around that, just not today. The launch abort test is planned for next year, approximately Q2. That should be a really exciting test. A pad abort test means you sort of mount it Dragon as though it’s on the rocket, for those that don’t know, and then you fire the escape thrusters, the Super Draco thrusters and it just bolts out of there at 6G. So it’s going to go like a bullet and then come back and land. That should be exciting. Probably Q2 next year. There is a whole series of additional tests. At some point, we want to do, kind of a big public unveiling of Dragon version 2.0. We just want to coordinate with NASA obviously. It looks pretty cool, I think. It’s meaningfully different from Dragon version 1.Thanks everyone and I think, many exciting days ahead. We’ll keep you informed as there are new developments.Great to see you. Thank you. You'll never guess who I picked up along the way as a hitchhiker. Yes, some hitchhiking in-fact. There was this guy who kept talking to me about 7 minute abs. I don't know whatthere he is.Well, I guess thewell, I like technology. I like doing things that have the potential to change the world in a positive way and the reasoning behind Tesla, specifically, was that there needed to be an acceleration of electric vehicles and it became clear to me thatand I think to a lot of peoplethat if it was simply left up to the big car companies we wouldn't see compelling electric cars. Not for a long time, and I think that became very clear in the movie Who Killed The Electric Car where GM recalled the EV1 and crushed them so no-one could get them back when California changed its regulations. That really hammered home the message that unless some new company came along and created an electric car, it'd be a long time before we would see sustainable transport. It was, absolutely. I've been a proponent of electric cars for a long time. When I was in college, when I was studying physics, it seemed just very obvious that electric cars are the future and I think all transport, with the ironic exception of rockets, will go electric. It's just a question of how fast it goes electric and we have a fundamental issue right now where there is an unpriced externality or tragedy of the commons that's on a scale that I don't think the world has ever seen before.  Yeah, exactly. I think that will eventually sink in, but the problem with the carbon capacity of the oceans and the atmosphere is that it's on such an epic scale with so much inertia that the point at which, if it becomes obvious that it's a severe problemit's like, imagine there's a supertanker coming towards you and, you know, it suddenly appears out of the fog, oh wait, supertanker coming towards me, you can't turn the supertanker real fast. It's going to keep going in that direction, so that's got a lot of inertia, and the amount of time that it'll take to switch the global industrial base to sustainable generation and consumption of energy is going to be measured in decades. So it's one of those things where you needbecause the transition will take so longyou have to start early and in order to have electric cars actually sell, we have to work super hard to make the cars as compelling as possible. That's the reason, I think, why the car ended up being a great car is because we had a really dedicated team that believes in the mission. At this point we're at around 600 per week, and our projections were about 400 per week. Panasonic, as our main supplier for the battery cells, was able to ramp up by 50%, but it's going to take them a little longer to improve production beyond that. I expect that our cell supply constraints will be solved, probably, around the middle of next year or maybe the second quarter but it has been good. It's been well received. I don't know if we've got the SpaceX video, that might be helpful to justif we can cue the SpaceX video, if we can, otherwise we'll just keep talking. Oh, here we go. Okay, great.  I'm not entirely sure I have a goodI think there's some amount of good fortune involved here, and I thinkI'm trying to think of, like, what is an accurate explanation here. I guess, I mean, there's certain things that I believe need to happen and I was able to convince a lot of great people to join me in trying to solve those problems. A lot of time I think people ascribe to me things where the credit is really due to a much bigger team. In fact, that's I thinkthe real answer is: if you can get a group of really talented people together and unite them around a challenge and have them work together to the best of their abilities then a company will achieve great things. A little bit, yeah. Actually, it's more like, I think people self-limit more than they realize. I keep getting asked this question: how do you do more innovation? I think the number one thing is people should just try. Literally, just try. Like, did you try yesterday? Did you try today? It is quiteit takes a lot of mental exertion to innovate and I think it is helpful to learn about different industries and try to cross-pollinate because very often people get silo-ed in a particular industry. So, me running both Tesla and SpaceX has been helpful because I see how both industries work and I can take things from one to another. Yeah, so, I'll give you a couple of examples. One is, say, the Model-S is an all aluminum body and chassis and we employ some advanced drawing techniques and advanced casting techniques and so forth, so that's like a fairly obvious thing if you're coming from the aerospace industry. You don't see a lot of aircraft made out of steel, but cars are all almost made out of steel. In order to make the Model-S light enough to make the non-battery-pack portion of the mass lightyou can get more range. The two big factors for range arewhat is your aerodynamic drag and how much does the car weigh. Those are overwhelmingly the big factors for range, and so, making the car weigh less was really important, and not just for rangefor handling and acceleration. So that was like an obvious thing, to make a car out of aluminum but the Model-S is, actually, the only car made out of aluminum in North America. In fact, there are very few cars made out of aluminum worldwide. The only other passenger vehicles are made in Europe, that are made out of aluminum. So that was an obvious thing to do, and on the other side, the car business is very good at manufacturing. It's actually incredible that a car, which is a super complicated object with dozens of subsystems, can actually be bought for the amount of money that it'syou know, you can get a pretty good car for $20,000. So, in taking the manufacturing techniques that were developed in the automotive industry and applying them to rocketry has been really helpful. In fact, our head of production at SpaceX came from the car industry. He used to run production of the Mini for BMW. There’s some reality to that perception. It was really tight.  I think innovating to avoid death.. I think.. well, I’ll tell you were things were in 2008 which was the most difficult time for Tesla as it was for many companies. In summer of 2008 we were trying to raise a financing round to take Tesla to the next level and then the financial markets fell apart, and we weren’t able to raise any money at all. So, just when we needed money, we weren’t able to raise any money and then you had General Motors and Chrysler which were going bankrupt, so trying to raise money for a startup electric car company in the face of General Motors going bankrupt was a very challenging endeavor. In fact, we weren’t able to raise any outside money. The only choice I had was invest all the money I had left. In fact, I had to borrow money from friends for living expenses. If things didn’t work out I would have been negativeessentiallybut because I was willing to invest everything that I had, the other investors in the company were willing to put up the other half of the money that was needed to keep Tesla alive. Then there was a whole bunch of dramas thatskipping a bunch of dramawe were actually able to close the financing round only on the last hour of the last day where it was possible and that was 6pm, Christmas Eve, 2008. That was literallywe would have gone bankrupt a few days after Christmas. I think that is probably overstating it. I thought we were probably dying.  Yeah. I think it would have been irrational to have any other view. I should mention, some credit is also due to Daimler becausethey became an investor in early 2009. The Daimler money was crucial to the success of Tesla, although people often think that it was the US government investment that was the lifesaver for Teslait was not. The government loan that we got, we only received that infirst monies were received in March of 2010, when we were actually in okay shape. The government loan was an accelerant but it was not life or deathyeah yeahbut the Daimler investment was life or death.  Yeah, they’re great. We’re coming out with the Mercedes B class, which is an all electric car. It’ll be the biggest electric car program in Daimler history, in fact, bigger than the sum of all electric vehicle programs that have been done to-date. That goes into production, I believe, in March or April. Yes, absolution, in fact we’re now opening up supercharger, I think, every two or three days.  I don’t actually have the right up to the minute count, but I think we must be approaching 50 or 60.  and Internationally. We’ve got 80% of the population of Norway covered. Norway’s actually our highest per-capita sales by far.  I don’t know.. because Norway’s so awesome, that’s the reason. There’s a lot of reasons but I did find it funny that sometimes people wonder if our car works in the snow and it’s like, yeah, our number one sales per-capita is Norway. In fact, our number one customer lives above the arctic circle. I think he’s now on 12 or something. We give him priority because he’s awesome. He’s a super nice guy. He’s an optimologist actually and he’s in this town, I think it’s 15,000 peopleit’s called Narvik or somethingand he kind of just leaves them around town so people can drive them. Well, I did think it got a little crazy there. It went up to like $22 billion market cap, which isgiven that we’re goingto have revenue a little over $2 billion this yearthat’s revenueI’m like, this is probably a bit generous. Now, despite the fact that I said that on several occasions, when the stock did eventually correct I got a bunch of shareholder lawsuits. Like, I mean, I didn’t want it to be up that high anyway, and then it dropped and then you get sued for the drop. I’m like, what? I think it’s a big distraction actually. “I mean, the market is like a manic depressive.” I mean, one day it’s super great and then it’s negative and thenit’s not like the underlying fundamentals of Tesla change that much, but the instantaneous price changes a huge amount. I think, first of all, it’s worth pointing out that we’re actually at what is arguably the best period of time in human history. I’m not sure what time would be better. Let me put it that way. In terms of violence per-capita in the world, we’re at the lowest ever in history. You wouldn’t necessarily know that reading the newspapers becauseyeah, people should read Steven Pinker, he’s awesome by the way. Violence is definitely lower nowit’s been sinusoidal, obviously in the 20th century there was somethere was some bad moments there in the 20th century. Butviolence per-capita, lowest in human history today and there’s a lot of talk about income inequality and what-not, but I think we should also think about information equality. The amount of information equality that exists in the world is unbelievable, as a result of the Internet. It’s really phenomenal becauseif you go back, say, 30 years ago, and say well, the President of the United States probably had the most access to information of any person on Earth but today, if you have access to the Internet, you’ve got access to more information than the President of the United States had 30 years ago. You have access to all the world’s information. You can go on Google and search for any book, any scholarly work. “Ya know, Wikipedia’s actually pretty damn good. It’s like 90% accurate. It’s just not clear what 90%.” But, it’s really incredible what you can learn, and how connected you can be to people all around the world. So, I think one shouldn’t ignore the negatives but I think one shouldn’t ignore the positives either. I do think something needs to change about, maybe, modern media because it’s like a misery microscope. A lot of the newspapers seem to beI actually think the magazines are pretty good. The magazines are more balanced, but thethe magazines do more long form articles that arethere’s still a negative bias in some magazines but it’s less negative than the newspapers. Newspapers tend to beit seems like“a lot of the major newspapers seem to be trying to answer the question: what is the worst thing that happened on Earth today?”  It does, and I think it does so for a fundamental evolutionary reason which is that we’re trained to respond to dangerous things, but we didn’t evolve to have global media. If something terrible happened in some far away part of the world that kind of triggers the negative response in our limbic system even though there’s no way that actually represents a danger, at all. It’s not something you should really worry about. Anyway, I think one can really have a severely negative biased view of the world reading newspapers, which is simply inaccurate. Yeah, those are interesting moves. I think it’sI do think something like the Washington Post is an important institution and should be preserved and hopefully Jeff can do a good job with it. I don’t totally understand the reasons for it, but I’m hopeful that it will be positive. I do think it is something we collectively should seek to address. I think to some degree it’s going to be at the personal selection front where people will simply choose to get their news in ways that are not from the newspaper, unless the newspaper changes. That’s the fundamental driver. It’s the action of all individuals who consume news that will drive the change. I think that is already happening. I mean, I get my news from Twitter. Well, uhh, I’m not sure exactly what you mean by that. The vehicles are constantly connected and so, in terms of analytical data we can see if a car has some issue that’s developing so we can be proactive about servicing that issue. We don’t store any sort of private information, like where someone’s been or how fast they went, or anything like that. Just to be clear. We do not store how fast they drove.  Yes. We certainly look at things at a statistical level to see what people are doing and try to figure out how we can make the car better. I mean, that’s really the reason for it. We look for data from the car, we look for feedback from customers, and we try to make the vehicle experience as compelling as possible. What really gets me excited is when people experience delight with the product. I don’t think there’s all that many things where you really experience delight and “if you can make the product good enough that it so far exceeds people’s expectations that it just makes them happy, I think that’s amazing.”Mr Chairman, ranking members of the committee, thank you for having me here today. SpaceX was founded to make radical improvements to space transport technology, with particular regard to reliability, safety and affordability. Today it is arguably one of the leading aerospace companies in the world with nearly 50 missions contracted at a value of approximately $5 billion. We've launched our Falcon 9 rocket eight times with 100% success rate, including four launches for NASA, three which docked with the International Space Station and have launched a sophisticated geostationary satellite for the world's leading satellite companies. We are restoring America's competitiveness in the global commercial space launch market as the only US company that has consistently winning head-to-head competitions for launch opportunities at the international level.With respect to the EELV program, I have five points to make. The first is that the Air Force and other agencies are simply paying too high a price for launch. The impact of relying on monopoly providers since 2006 were predictable and they have borne out. Space launch innovation has stagnated, competition has been stifled and prices have risen to levels that General Sheldon has called unsustainable. When the merge between Boeing and Lockheed's business occurred, the merger promised, in the press release, $150 million of savings. Instead, there were billions of dollars of cost overruns, and a non-recovery breach for the program exceeding 50% of its cost projections.According to congressional records, in FY14 the Air Force paid an average of $380 million for each national security launch, while subsidizing ULA's fixed costs to the tune of more than a billion dollars per year, even if they never launch a rocket. By contrast, SpaceX's price is well under a $100 million. Meaning a savings of almost $300 million per launch. Which, in many cases, would pay for the launch and the satellite combined. So, if you took something like a GPS satellite which about $140 million, you could actually have a free satellite with the launch. So, our launch plus the satellite would cost less than just their launch. Which is an enormous difference, and we seek no subsidies to maintain our business.To put this into perspective, had SpaceX been awarded the missions ULA had been under it's recent non-competed 36 core block buy, we would have saved the tax payers $11.6 billion.Point number two. Competition is coming to the national security launch market. This has been acknowledged, and we are ready to compete for that. In order to be certified as an EELV provider SpaceX had to meet a number of requirements that were never demanded of the incumbent provider. We were required to successfully launch three flights of our upgraded Falcon 9 vehicle, which we achieved in January. Under our EELV certification agreement we've undertaking vigorous engineering reviews with the Air Force. To-date we've delivered more than 30,000 data items to the Air Force and provided total access to our internal systems. We've talked to more than 300 government officials for certification, and we hope to complete that certification this year.Point number three is that we really believe that robust competition must begin this calendar year. We applaud the early steps the Air Force and NRO have taken to reintroduce competition into the EELV program. In 2012 the Air Force, under direction from the Secretary of Defense, committed to competing up to 14 missions, with 5 missions available for competition this year. Of course, we would have greatly preferred that the Air Force open all of its missions to competition, and we have serious concerns that the 5 missions that will be competed this year will not actually be awarded this year. We recently learned that perhaps only one will be awarded this year.Point four, with the advent of competition, launch should really be viewed as a commodity and any competition between new entrants and ULA, should properly acknowledge the launch subsidy received by the incumbent. Consistent with federal procurement regulations, and DoD acquisition directives, when a competitive environment exists, the government should use firm fixed price FAR part 12 contracts which properly incent contractors to deliver on time and on budget. That means eliminating the billion dollar annual subsidy to ULA, which creates an extremely unequal playing field.The final point is that our Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy launch vehicles are truly made in America. We design and manufacture the rockets in California and Texas, with key suppliers throughout the country and launch them from either Vandenberg Air Force Base or Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. This stands in stark contrast to the United Launch Alliance’s most frequently flown vehicle, the Atlas V, which uses a Russian main engine and where possibly half the airframe is manufactured overseas. In light of Russia’s defacto-annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea region and the formal severing of military ties, “the Atlas V cannot possibly be described as providing assured access to space for our nation when supply of its main engine depends on President Putin’s permission.” Given this development, it would seem prudent to reconsider whether the 36 core, uncompeted sole-source award to ULA is truly in the best interests of the people of the United States.I thank the committee for this opportunity and look forward to addressing any questions. Yeah, absolutely. First, I should mention that the premise of perfect success in not quite correct for ULA. They certainly have a very good track record but the first Delta IV Heavy failed and there was a partial failure of one of the Atlas missions, which resulted in a satellite having reduced life. So, it’s certainly a good, but it’s not quite correct to say it’sit would be a flawed premise to say that it’s perfect. What I think is a logical sort of thing going forward is if there would be two families of rockets but not three families of rockets. Currently ULA has both the Atlas and the Delta, but those are redundant. We don’t need both of those rocket families, and I think it would make sense tofor the long-term security of the countryto phase out the Atlas V, which depends on the Russian engine, and have ULA operate the Delta family, SpaceX operate the Falcon family, giving the Defense Department assured access to space with two completely different rocket families. I think that’s the logical thing to do, going forward, and I think it would be the best thing, in every respect, for the country. I think, as a country, we’ve generally decided that competition in the free market is a good thing and that monopolies are not good, and it’s interesting to note that from the point from which Boeing and Lockheed’s launch business mergedthe point where they stopped being competitorsthe costs doubled since then. I think the reality is, when competition is introducedreliability is a key factor in competition. That would be a deciding factor in who wins what launches. It doesn’t become less important, it becomes more important, but the cost to the US tax payer will drop substantially. I think they would drop, at least to the level that they were before Boeing and Lockheed became a monopoly in the launch business and perhaps even better than that. “And frankly, if our rockets are good enough for NASA, why are they not good enough for the Air Force? It doesn’t make sense.” The Air Force certification process appears to be going quite well and we’re not aware of any issues that would prevent us from being certified to fly missionscompleting that certification this yearwe are concerned about any delays in the contracting and hopefully those delays don’t materialize. As I mentioned in my earlier testimony, I think in light of recent events on the international stage, it may be wise to consider whether procuring the Atlas as part of the 36 core block buy, which is a five year buyas mentioned earlier by Mr Gass, they only have a two year supply of engines, and yet this contract is a five year contract for the 36 cores. So, if there are any sanctions or if there is any issue with the supply of those engines, there will not be assured access to space for the Atlas V. I’m very hopeful that the Air Force will adhere to that requirement.  I’m highly confident that we’ll be able to, yes. Certainly. We provide full and detailed insight into all of our costs. We’ve been doing so for a long time to NASA and we’re also providing that to the Air Force. So, the government has complete insight into our cost structure. There is additional cost for US government missions due to the mission assurance process, because the US government does not buy launch insurance. So, in order to improve the probability of success there is quite a substantial mission assurance overhead that’s applied. Which is why our launch costs are estimated to be 50% higher for Air Force flights than for commercial flights. So, instead of $60 million for a commercial mission, it’s $90 million, but that compares to more like $380 million for United Launch Alliance. So, even when you add the Air Force overhead, there is still a huge difference. In fact, all of the numbers I was referring to, are including the Air Force overhead.  Absolutely. I would, although I’d like to point out that there were two highly publicized failure investigations, one for Delta IV Heavy, one for Atlas. The Air Force conducted failure investigations. ULA has a very good track record. It’s not quite as good as 68 perfect launches. Right, well, by ULA’s definition of success, that mission was perfect.  Right, the primary mission which was to deliver the CASSIOPE satellite, was 100% successful. There was a secondary satellite that was an optional objective, that was not part of the primary mission. But as I said, if you accept ULA’s definition of perfect success then that mission was perfectly successful. Sure. Well, the reality today is that there’s a steady cadence of Air Force and NRO missions every year. So, you don’t really have the wide difference from one year to the next that you had in the past. So, I think the prior justification for needing that subsidy for stability is no longer there as there is a stable launch demand from the Air Force and intelligence community. Secondly, I go back to the point that there’s really not a need for ULA to maintain two families of rocketboth the Delta and the Atlasand given that the Atlas is dependent upon a Russian main engine which can be cut off at any time, the logical thing to do is to eliminate the Atlas family, have the Delta and Falcon family and that will provide the greatest amount of assured access, and the greatest reliability and the cost savings that the government is looking for. I believe SpaceX can manage all of the Air Force requirements. We might argue that maybe some of those requirements shouldn’t be there, but we will meet whatever requirements the Air Force asks of us and we believe we can manage all of the Air Force’s satellites and then some.  I think fixed price competition is the better way to go whenwhen there’s competition, the logical thing to do is to go for fixed price because otherwise if you compete it and it’s cost-plus then it gives the companies the opportunity to raise their prices effectively as their costs grow relative to the competition. Certainly. I think that the logical thing to do is to do a fixed price competition for the basic vehicle and to the degree that there are mission-unique requirementswhich is a fairly small part of the missionthat that would be cost-plus. So, if the Air Force says, well, there’s a unique national security satellite, it’s going to require these additional changes to the rocket or to the mission, or it’s going to require priority, then just that incremental piece would be logical to make cost-plus, but the vast majority of the contract would be fixed price.Mr Chairman, ranking members of the committee, thank you for having me here today. SpaceX was founded to make radical improvements to space transport technology, with particular regard to reliability, safety and affordability. Today it is arguably one of the leading aerospace companies in the world with nearly 50 missions contracted at a value of approximately $5 billion. We've launched our Falcon 9 rocket eight times with 100% success rate, including four launches for NASA, three which docked with the International Space Station and have launched a sophisticated geostationary satellite for the world's leading satellite companies. We are restoring America's competitiveness in the global commercial space launch market as the only US company that has consistently winning head-to-head competitions for launch opportunities at the international level.With respect to the EELV program, I have five points to make. The first is that the Air Force and other agencies are simply paying too high a price for launch. The impact of relying on monopoly providers since 2006 were predictable and they have borne out. Space launch innovation has stagnated, competition has been stifled and prices have risen to levels that General Sheldon has called unsustainable. When the merge between Boeing and Lockheed's business occurred, the merger promised, in the press release, $150 million of savings. Instead, there were billions of dollars of cost overruns, and a non-recovery breach for the program exceeding 50% of its cost projections.According to congressional records, in FY14 the Air Force paid an average of $380 million for each national security launch, while subsidizing ULA's fixed costs to the tune of more than a billion dollars per year, even if they never launch a rocket. By contrast, SpaceX's price is well under a $100 million. Meaning a savings of almost $300 million per launch. Which, in many cases, would pay for the launch and the satellite combined. So, if you took something like a GPS satellite which about $140 million, you could actually have a free satellite with the launch. So, our launch plus the satellite would cost less than just their launch. Which is an enormous difference, and we seek no subsidies to maintain our business.To put this into perspective, had SpaceX been awarded the missions ULA had been under it's recent non-competed 36 core block buy, we would have saved the tax payers $11.6 billion.Point number two. Competition is coming to the national security launch market. This has been acknowledged, and we are ready to compete for that. In order to be certified as an EELV provider SpaceX had to meet a number of requirements that were never demanded of the incumbent provider. We were required to successfully launch three flights of our upgraded Falcon 9 vehicle, which we achieved in January. Under our EELV certification agreement we've undertaking vigorous engineering reviews with the Air Force. To-date we've delivered more than 30,000 data items to the Air Force and provided total access to our internal systems. We've talked to more than 300 government officials for certification, and we hope to complete that certification this year.Point number three is that we really believe that robust competition must begin this calendar year. We applaud the early steps the Air Force and NRO have taken to reintroduce competition into the EELV program. In 2012 the Air Force, under direction from the Secretary of Defense, committed to competing up to 14 missions, with 5 missions available for competition this year. Of course, we would have greatly preferred that the Air Force open all of its missions to competition, and we have serious concerns that the 5 missions that will be competed this year will not actually be awarded this year. We recently learned that perhaps only one will be awarded this year.Point four, with the advent of competition, launch should really be viewed as a commodity and any competition between new entrants and ULA, should properly acknowledge the launch subsidy received by the incumbent. Consistent with federal procurement regulations, and DoD acquisition directives, when a competitive environment exists, the government should use firm fixed price FAR part 12 contracts which properly incent contractors to deliver on time and on budget. That means eliminating the billion dollar annual subsidy to ULA, which creates an extremely unequal playing field.The final point is that our Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy launch vehicles are truly made in America. We design and manufacture the rockets in California and Texas, with key suppliers throughout the country and launch them from either Vandenberg Air Force Base or Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. This stands in stark contrast to the United Launch Alliance’s most frequently flown vehicle, the Atlas V, which uses a Russian main engine and where possibly half the airframe is manufactured overseas. In light of Russia’s defacto-annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea region and the formal severing of military ties, “the Atlas V cannot possibly be described as providing assured access to space for our nation when supply of its main engine depends on President Putin’s permission.” Given this development, it would seem prudent to reconsider whether the 36 core, uncompeted sole-source award to ULA is truly in the best interests of the people of the United States.I thank the committee for this opportunity and look forward to addressing any questions. Yeah, absolutely. First, I should mention that the premise of perfect success in not quite correct for ULA. They certainly have a very good track record but the first Delta IV Heavy failed and there was a partial failure of one of the Atlas missions, which resulted in a satellite having reduced life. So, it’s certainly a good, but it’s not quite correct to say it’sit would be a flawed premise to say that it’s perfect. What I think is a logical sort of thing going forward is if there would be two families of rockets but not three families of rockets. Currently ULA has both the Atlas and the Delta, but those are redundant. We don’t need both of those rocket families, and I think it would make sense tofor the long-term security of the countryto phase out the Atlas V, which depends on the Russian engine, and have ULA operate the Delta family, SpaceX operate the Falcon family, giving the Defense Department assured access to space with two completely different rocket families. I think that’s the logical thing to do, going forward, and I think it would be the best thing, in every respect, for the country. I think, as a country, we’ve generally decided that competition in the free market is a good thing and that monopolies are not good, and it’s interesting to note that from the point from which Boeing and Lockheed’s launch business mergedthe point where they stopped being competitorsthe costs doubled since then. I think the reality is, when competition is introducedreliability is a key factor in competition. That would be a deciding factor in who wins what launches. It doesn’t become less important, it becomes more important, but the cost to the US tax payer will drop substantially. I think they would drop, at least to the level that they were before Boeing and Lockheed became a monopoly in the launch business and perhaps even better than that. “And frankly, if our rockets are good enough for NASA, why are they not good enough for the Air Force? It doesn’t make sense.” The Air Force certification process appears to be going quite well and we’re not aware of any issues that would prevent us from being certified to fly missionscompleting that certification this yearwe are concerned about any delays in the contracting and hopefully those delays don’t materialize. As I mentioned in my earlier testimony, I think in light of recent events on the international stage, it may be wise to consider whether procuring the Atlas as part of the 36 core block buy, which is a five year buyas mentioned earlier by Mr Gass, they only have a two year supply of engines, and yet this contract is a five year contract for the 36 cores. So, if there are any sanctions or if there is any issue with the supply of those engines, there will not be assured access to space for the Atlas V. I’m very hopeful that the Air Force will adhere to that requirement.  I’m highly confident that we’ll be able to, yes. Certainly. We provide full and detailed insight into all of our costs. We’ve been doing so for a long time to NASA and we’re also providing that to the Air Force. So, the government has complete insight into our cost structure. There is additional cost for US government missions due to the mission assurance process, because the US government does not buy launch insurance. So, in order to improve the probability of success there is quite a substantial mission assurance overhead that’s applied. Which is why our launch costs are estimated to be 50% higher for Air Force flights than for commercial flights. So, instead of $60 million for a commercial mission, it’s $90 million, but that compares to more like $380 million for United Launch Alliance. So, even when you add the Air Force overhead, there is still a huge difference. In fact, all of the numbers I was referring to, are including the Air Force overhead.  Absolutely. I would, although I’d like to point out that there were two highly publicized failure investigations, one for Delta IV Heavy, one for Atlas. The Air Force conducted failure investigations. ULA has a very good track record. It’s not quite as good as 68 perfect launches. Right, well, by ULA’s definition of success, that mission was perfect.  Right, the primary mission which was to deliver the CASSIOPE satellite, was 100% successful. There was a secondary satellite that was an optional objective, that was not part of the primary mission. But as I said, if you accept ULA’s definition of perfect success then that mission was perfectly successful. Sure. Well, the reality today is that there’s a steady cadence of Air Force and NRO missions every year. So, you don’t really have the wide difference from one year to the next that you had in the past. So, I think the prior justification for needing that subsidy for stability is no longer there as there is a stable launch demand from the Air Force and intelligence community. Secondly, I go back to the point that there’s really not a need for ULA to maintain two families of rocketboth the Delta and the Atlasand given that the Atlas is dependent upon a Russian main engine which can be cut off at any time, the logical thing to do is to eliminate the Atlas family, have the Delta and Falcon family and that will provide the greatest amount of assured access, and the greatest reliability and the cost savings that the government is looking for. I believe SpaceX can manage all of the Air Force requirements. We might argue that maybe some of those requirements shouldn’t be there, but we will meet whatever requirements the Air Force asks of us and we believe we can manage all of the Air Force’s satellites and then some.  I think fixed price competition is the better way to go whenwhen there’s competition, the logical thing to do is to go for fixed price because otherwise if you compete it and it’s cost-plus then it gives the companies the opportunity to raise their prices effectively as their costs grow relative to the competition. Certainly. I think that the logical thing to do is to do a fixed price competition for the basic vehicle and to the degree that there are mission-unique requirementswhich is a fairly small part of the missionthat that would be cost-plus. So, if the Air Force says, well, there’s a unique national security satellite, it’s going to require these additional changes to the rocket or to the mission, or it’s going to require priority, then just that incremental piece would be logical to make cost-plus, but the vast majority of the contract would be fixed price.It looks like everything looks great in terms of the ascent phase of the mission. The rocket flight was perfect as far as we could tell and Dragon deployment went well. We had some slight initial challenges with Dragon with respect to enabling some of the thruster quads but those have been resolved. So it looks like everything is good on the Dragon front. For the rocket boost stage reentry, we have good data down to a pretty low level. To roughly around Mach 1.1 everything looks fine, and we're waiting for additional data to see how the potential landing burn went, but it was a very heavy sea state condition so I wouldn't give high odds that the rocket was able to splashdown successfully. I don't know of anything.. do we have anything on the.. it's obviously.. NASA's our customer here so we defer to NASA as to what cargo is manifested, but I don't think we put anything onboard ourselves.We were a little delayed in the launch. Maybe I wasn't speaking clearly. I said I wouldn't give high odds. The sea state is quite heavy. I heard reports of 15 to 20 foot wave high. It's really pretty crazy out there. In fact the boats weren't able to get particularly close because of the heavy seas. I think it's unlikely that the rocket was able to splashdown successfully, but I think we'll still get good data from the plane telemetry and we should get that pretty soon. As soon as we are able to look at that data we'll be able to provide some more information but I would consider it a success in the sense that we were able to control the boost stage to a zero roll rate, which is previously what has destroyed the stagean uncontrolled roll where the on-board nitrogen thrusters were not able to overcome the aerodynamic torque and that sort of spun up. This time, with more powerful thrusters, and more nitrogen propellant, we were to null the roll rate. So that's a bit of good news there, and of course, we were able to show that on ascent the legs don't have any negative impact and that we were able to come back through hypersonic velocity. We don't yet have the data through transonic but we have it through the max dynamic forcing coming throughwhat's called max-Qwe have information on the rocket coming through max-Q okay. I'm quite anxious obviously to find that out and it'd be awesome ifas far as it gets, that data we'll be able to use to flow back into the next flight, with an increased probability of a successful recovery. We're probably going to have to iterate our way there I think.I should mention, one of the side points is, we did a longer coast and restart of the upper stage. This was a very optional thing, just to see what our propellant residuals were and what the environment would be on the stage during a depletion shutdown. The upper stage coasted for about 35 minutes and then restarted for a few seconds, and went to essentially zero liquid oxygen level with about 0.15% of propellant mass in fuel remaining, which is very close to our target. That’s helpful for us to reduce the uncertainty associated with propellant residuals and thus improve the mission performance margin calculation on future missions. Well, right now I’m on the phone, so.. when I left about 15 minutes ago, everything was looking good. There was an isolation valve that feeds two of the thruster quads and that valve was not responding, so we went to the backup valve and that one worked fine. So, when I left everything was looking good for all thrusters enabled on the vehicle. So, as far as I know, we’re on track to make that burn. We think we can probably still do ten, but it’s a bit too early to tell if all ten will go this year. The main constraint is actually on vehicle production, which all boils down to this one particular partan injector casting and we think we’ve resolved that particular issue, which should unlock quite a high rate of increased production and bottom line is, I think we’ll do ten or something very close to ten this year. Obviously, it’s a launch a month or slightly better than a launch per month. We don’t yet know enough to say whether there’s any commonality between this particular valve and the valve issue in the one that occurred previously. I don’t think it’s the same, and one has to be careful about making snap judgements until one has all the information. So, I don’t think it’s the same but we don’t yet know. I feeling pretty excited. This is a happy day. “Most important of all is we did a good job for NASA. I always think, did we do a good job for our customer? Everything else is secondary to that.” It seems like we’ve done the job we were contracted for, or at least thus far, it hasn’t hooked up with the space station yet, but number one I’m super happy that we have made progress so far for our NASA customer. On top of that, I’m also excited that we got good data through max dynamic pressure of the reentry of the boost stage, and even though we probably won’t get the stage back, I think we’re really starting to connect the dots of what’s needed. When you combine the take off and landing yesterday of the flight design landing legs and the greater progress of the boost stage on this flight today, there’s just only a few more dots that need to be there to have it all work and “I think we’ve got a decent chance of bringing a stage back this year, which would be wonderful.” What we’ve done thus far is just evolutionary improvements, but that holds the potential for something more significant. I know what happened.. I thought that question might be asked, so I looked into it. We sprayed a bunch of water around the pad and, essentially what happened is we splashed dirty water on ourselves. It’s a little embarrassing, but no harm done. There is a step beyond simply reusing something that is important. There’s some conditions on reuse in order to make the reuse have a big effect on the space industry, which is that the reuse must be both rapid and complete, like an aircraft or a car or something like that. If you had to disassemble and reassemble a car and replace a bunch of parts in-between driving it would make it quite expensive. It’s true that we don’t just have to recover it, we have to show that it can be reflown quickly and easily with the only thing changing being reloading propellant and other, basically the equivalent of refueling. The vehicle is designed for that. Ya know, the unfortunate thing with the shuttle was that the original design for the shuttle was fairly well suited for good reuse but then the requirements changed and made it very difficult to reuse efficiently. So, as long as we’re able to hold to our requirements I think we’ll be able to achieve the rapid and essentially complete reuse. What I’m hoping will occur, and I’m feeling a little bit more optimistic about it, is that this year at least we’ll be able to recover the rocket booster. I’m not sure we’ll be able to refly it this year, but I think reflying it next year is likely if we recover it this year. That will complete the picture, at least as far as the boost stage is concerned. I don’t actually know the exact number, I think it’s about 400 to 500 km downrange, away from the cape, essentially, and then the nearest shore is, I think, 200 to 300 km. That’s the nominal splashdown point.. which it was headed for I should mention. It was headed quite precisely for the target splashdown point, so that’s.. umm, yeah.I have to head back to the control room as I have some telemetry to look at, so I’ll only be on for another two minutes or so. From the SpaceX side of it, there were a fair bit of new things with this rocket and with the Dragon avionics. This was quite a substantial revision of Dragon avionics, for example, a new software the accompanied it, and of course the rocket had the landing legs and improved nitrogen thrusters and a few others things. It was definitely not ideal. In the future we want to try to get to launching exactly on time without any delays and definitely get away from having delays. That’s not our aspiration. But I do think the teams did a great job of responding to the various issues and I’m certainly very proud of what they’ve done. Sure, I’ll answer that question and then I’m going to have to jump off the call. The Orbcomm launch is expected to happen in the next 4 to 6 weeks and we want to, obviously, make sure we review carefully the data from this launch because, although everything went fine, we always review the data to see if there were any near miss issues that need to be looked into and corrected. We don’t know of anything yet, but we want to make sure of that. Regarding the F9R, we’re going to have.. really, we’re going to keep doing tests at our McGregor test site near Waco with the F9R stage. So what we have at McGregor in Texas is what we call F9R-Dev-1 which is, development unit one. There’s also dev-2. So, one of those will be at McGregor and one of those will be at Spaceport America in New Mexico. Anything we can test at a relatively low altitude, below around 10,000 feet, we’ll continue to do in Mcgregor, and then the high altitude stuff where it’s going ex-atmospheric, and going to 300,000 feet, we’ll be doing in New Mexico because we need a much better clear area. I would expect those tests to be.. we’ll continue refining the technology over time because you’ll recall the question that was asked earlier, reusability only matters to the degree that it’s rapid and complete otherwise it’s reusability but you don’t get the equivalent economic benefit that has the huge potential to open up spaceflight. Alright, thanks for the question.Yeah, I think certainly safety's really important. I think it's particularly important when there's the potential for mass destruction. Ya know, it'sI think AI is something that is risky at the civilization level, not merely at the individual risk level, and that's why it really demands a lot of safety research. That's why I've committed to fund $10 million worth of AI safety research, and I'll probably do more. I think that's just the beginning. I'm in Texas?  I hope it's only twice.  Right, absolutely. Really, all we're saying at Tesla is that we want to be able to sell our cars directly to consumers in Texas. I think this is directly in line with the ethos of Texas. In fact, restricting what consumers can do, in terms of buying direct, is extremely un-Texan. It's very weird that it even exists. I mean, if you think of something like Michael Dell's company Dell Direct. Dell started his company in Texas selling direct to consumers. If the same laws had existed for computers as it does for cars then Dell wouldn't exist, or it would be in some other state. It reallyI think it's something on the books that most Texans aren't even aware of, that is fundamentally un-Texan and needs to be changed. The law currently says that in order to sell a car in Texas you have to sell through a franchised dealer, but this exists only for alcohol and cars, which is weird. Probably that shouldn't exist either, but it's just weird that it's cars. What theya know. We can sell direct in every other country in the world, and every state in the United States except for about half a dozen. We're just asking for essentially a modification of the law to allow for us to sell direct to consumers. Yeah, I don't think we're a huge threat to the car dealers. Yeah, we might grow from 0.1% to 1% perhaps, or 2%, but it's not something that I think is fundamentally a threat to the car dealers and the problem is that the incumbent car dealers have a conflict of interest. They make all their money from selling gasoline cars. For them to then tout the advantages of an electric car when most of their money is coming from gasoline carsit's a conflict of interest. They're not going to do that. So, if we were to go through them, we'd fail. Yeah, but they alwayselectric cars sales in the United States are very low.  In the long term yes. We've actually struck compromises in a number of other states where we've allowed to openlet's take the state of New York for example, we're allowed to have up to five stores in the state of New York. So, if we were to do something like that proportionally in Texas, maybe we'd havebecause Texas is a bigger stateseven stores. Then say, after seven stores, at that point, we'd have to go to franchises or something like that.  Yeah, absolutely.  Yeah. We'd certainly consider that down the road but I can certainly say that anyone who's been a huge jerk to us thus far is not going to be one of those franchisees.  No, if they've been punching us in the face, they shouldn't expect we're going to be their friend. I think there's a couple of points that are worth clarifying. For Tesla, sales and demand are two different things. The way that sales is measured is in terms of deliveries. Whereas, for the rest of the car industry, because the cars aren't ordered in advance, demand and deliveries are the same thing. Their cars are out on the lotthey're not built to order, they're out on the lot. So, it's extremely common for people to misunderstand demand and sales for Tesla. Accounting for Tesla sales is how many cars we deliver but the measure of demand is how many cars have been ordered. We have far more cars ordered than we can deliver, right now. We're trying to solve that problem by ramping up our production. It's important to note that the demand for our cars significantly exceeds our production capacity, currently.  Yes. Maybe at some point this will become clear, but because Tesla is like a different animal than the rest car industry, the numbers mean different things. People look at our deliveries, or sales, and take that as a proxy for demand. Whereas the actual proxy for demand is how many unfulfilled ordered do we have? It's more like the aircraft business where they'll have an order backlog. Right now, the wait time for a Tesla, if you order one, is anywhere from three to five months.  A month? If we can get it down to low single digit weeks, I think that's ideal. Well, there certainly are taxes on electricity generation. There's registration fees and that kind of thing.  Well, gas taxes can't be very high because the price of gas in Texas is real low. It's like super-cheap.  Yeah, sure they should. Maybe there should be, at some point, some increased tax on electric gas or something like that to match that of gasoline cars, but I can't imaginelike I saidthat there's very much revenue generated from Texans on gasoline, given the low price of gasoline. I think there's a lot more awareness. There actually are a lot of Tesla customers in Texas.  Yeah, but still, there's a lot of supporters, and I think there's a lot more awareness in the Texas state legislature this time than there was last time. We are being out-lobbied by the car dealers association by, probably, 10 to 1.  Well, I certainly hope not, but yeah, it's certainly crazy. The Texas Auto Dealers Association has really pulled out all the stops. They've said they'll spend all it takes to win. I think they're outspending us at least 10 to 1, maybe more, but at the end of the day I think we have the people of Texas on our side, because all we're trying to do is give people in Texas the right to choose how they buy their car. Why should they be denied that right?  Who does?  That's most unfortunate.  It wasn't punishment. It certainly wasn't helpful, but it wasn't punishment, no. We are actually still strongly considering the long termand please, I hope this doesn't become some huge news articlebut we are considering, in the long, future vehicle and battery plants and Texas would certainly be a strong contender for those. Yeah, I've been doing business in Texas for 13 yearswhen we established the rocket development facility in McGregor, near Waco. That's worked out really well for us. It's the most advanced rocket development facility in the world at this point. It's something the people of Texas are very proud about. We're establishing the first commercial orbital launch site in the world at Boca Chica near Brownsville. So I thinkI mean, I love Texas. I come here a lot. Certainly a big big fan. I think, within the space community, certainly, it was I think well understood. The mission was completely successful in delivering cargo to the space station, which was the primary mission, and I would consider partly successful in trying to do something that's never been attempted beforewhich is to land a rocket stage successfully. Every other rocket in the world, the rocket stage is basically smashed into the atmosphere, explode and then further explode when they hit the ocean, or the steppes of Kazakhstan or something like thatif it's a Russian rocket. There's a whole industry collecting rocket parts out there in Kazakhstan. They have a launch site in Plesetsk as well. Basically, the Siberian steppes collectively. But all the other rockets, like the European rockets and the Boeing and Lockheed rockets, all of their stages basically just smash bits and land somewhere at the bottom of the ocean. What we were trying to do was to land our rocket stagebecause it's a very difficult thing. This thing is coming in from hypersonic velocity. It's got to multiple relights of the main engine. It's got attitude control thrusters. It's got slosh baffles. It's got these hypersonic grid fins. This is extremely difficult. Well, yeah. In the rocket industry, this is considered sort of crazy, and very unlikely to succeed. Certainly very unlikely to succeed. As it turns out, we were able to actually hit the drone ship. It was sort of at higher velocity landing thanyeah. It’s what we call a RUDa rapid unscheduled disassembly. It’s a technical term. I think we’ve got a decent chance of landing it intact on one of the later missions this year.  Yeah, in about three or four weeks we’ve got another flight. This is actually a tougher reentry conditionit’s coming in hotter and faster than the last flight, so that does throw a little bit moreit makes it a little trickier, but we’ve got 50% more hydraulic fluid, which was thewe ran out of hydraulic fluid last time. So I think we may fail the landing again, but hopefully for a different reason.  I expected it to fail. Yeah yeah, I said we’ve got a best of 50% chance and even that I said I’m kinda making that up. Ya know, I said I don’t really know. We haven’t actually received that money yet.  Well, I mean, I think the way to look at it is more like you’re a landlord and you’re looking for anchor tenants. You’re trying to make the decision of if we try to bring this company or this facility to Texas, is it going to be a net gain for the state or is it not? Sometimes you’ll be right about that, sometimes wrong. It’s important to structure any incentives such that it’s a guaranteed win for the state. In the case of the incentives for the Boca Chica facility, we have to repay that money . Yes.  Yes.  Yes. A lot of them are directly tied. So we create the job, then we get on a per-job basis some incentive.  Umm… no, I think we would not have come. “No, we wouldn’t have come because it would have been quite rude to not have offered incentives.” It more likewhat I mean is, a state has to show that it really wants a company to be there. Ultimately, SpaceX will spend hundreds of millions of dollars on that facility. Vastly in excess of what the incentives would be. So, how much do the incentives really make a difference in the grand scheme of things? Not that big of a difference but it’s sort of like, it’syou don’t feel welcome. It doesn’t feel like this state really cares unless it does something. There’s got to be a little bit of skin in the game. There’s got to be some contribution. Ya know, that’s all it really is. Sure. I think, first of all it’s likeI think when thinking about these things, we need to say what is right? What is the origin of this lawwhy is there this restriction at all? The restriction actually originates from when a bunch of the big car companies tried to get back their franchises and engaged in nefarious behavior to do thatparticularly Ford under Jack Nasser. They put all these pressure tactics on the car dealeron the franchisees, to sell the franchises back to the car company. Then, the reaction from the franchisees, who had bought and paid for their franchises and who had invested all this moneytheir cause was just and they went with their just cause to the legislature and they said, look, if we abort our franchise and we’ve invested our time and money to build this franchise it is not right for the franchiser to then engage in pressure tactics to then force us to sell it back them at a fire sale price. Obviously, that would betheir cause was just. But now they’re taking legislation that was meant for a just cause and then applying it to an unjust cause, which is to say that a company that has never granted them a franchise must be forced to grant them a franchise. This is not right.  No, I don’t think it should be a Tesla-only bill. That wouldn’t be fair. It should be, perhaps, limited to new technology vehicles or limited to a certain number of stores or something like that. I don’t think it should be just for Tesla, but nor should it erode the franchise that they’ve bought and paid for and put a lot of time into. That wouldn’t be right either. It should just be that if somebody hasn’t granted them a franchise, they shouldn’t be forced to grant them a franchise. It’d be like if Apple came here and wanted to sell computers then with the same legislation they’d have to like, give out Apple franchised stores or something. That wouldn’t make any sense. They’ve alive and well.  No, basically, in more than 40 out of 50 states that we sell cars the dealers are doing fine. Nobody’s in trouble or.. No terrible thing has happened to the dealers in any of the other states. We currently sell in over 30 countries and these franchise restrictions don’t exist in any of those countries, and the dealers are fine there too. Yeah, absolutely, and there’s plenty of examples where there are franchise restaurants and company owned restaurants or a mixture of franchise and company owned. Like McDonalds has a mixture of company owned and franchised next door. It works fine. So, I think it’s a pretty reasonable thing to ask that if we want to sell direct that we have the right to do so and that consumers in Texas have the right to choose how they want to buy their car.I know we’re running short on time, but there is one announcement that I’d like to make. This is the transportation forum. We’re going to create a Hyperloop test facility. I don’t know if people have read aboutit’s kind of a new mode of transport.  Yeah. In order to help things along we’re going to create a Hyperloop test track. Something that’s maybe on the order of a five mile loop. Texas in the leading candidate.  There’s no quid pro quo here. It certainly would be nice. It would be appreciated.  We’re just figuring that out. I was just discussing it with some members of my team last night, who are pretty excited about doing this.  I actually don’t know, but we’re not asking for any money from the state.  Yeah. Yeah, but if somebody wants to chip in, I won’t stop them. This would be kind of a sub-scale track and the thing we were talking about last nightit’s not fully formed, we’re just sort of figuring it outis to have a test facility where different teams from university or even little companies that people form, could use this test track to validate their ideas on designing the pod system for the Hyperloop. The test track is an expensive capital item, so if we can build the test track and then offer that for use by companies or the teams of students to try out their pod design. Something that we might end up doingor, at least it sounded good last night, after a couple of drinks Shoot from the hip. There’s this really awesome competition called Formula SAE where students groups work together to design and build a race car and then they race it at the end of the season and whoever builds the best race car wins.  Yeah, but it’s pretty sophisticated. Some of our best engineers have come from that program and really learnt who to do great engineering as a result of that. So I think it could be kind of fun to have some sort of Formula SAE thing for the Hyperloop. People could compete on, say, who could make the pod go the fastest. Maybe compete on other dimensions. I think that could be pretty fun. We’re going to talk to the Formula SAE organizers and see if they think this would be good.  Yeah.Thank you.We were able to hit the ship, which it looks like with all the simulations that if we had not run short of hydraulic fluid about a minute before landing that we would have actually landed. With the next flight we have 50% more hydraulic fluid margin. Something else could go wrong, certainly, but at least with respect to that, it should cover. So there's a real decent chance, within three weeks, of landing it. No, I was actually at mission control, which is here, but if it had landed I would have flown out to Florida to see it come to port. I was there for the attempt a week ago, at Cape Canaveral, but I couldn't get out there this time around.  Yeah, that'd be really great. Yeah, it's a really big deal. For all modes of transport, there's a night and day difference if they're reusable or not. You can imagine, if aircraft were single use nobody would fly, or there would be a handful of missions for scientific and military purposes but that's about it. A 747 is $250 million, you'd need two of them for a round trip but nobody's paying half a million dollars to fly to London and back. For our rocket, which isit costs about $60 million, which is actuallyit's the lowest cost rocket in the world, despite not being reusable, or at the start not flying as reusable. Still $60 million is a lot, but if we could do a thousand flights, it comes from a $60 million capital cost to a $60,000 capital cost. Aircraft do tens of thousands of flights, so if we can just do an order of magnitude fewer flights conceivably than an aircraft can do, it's a giant giant difference. The cost of the fuel and oxidizer and all that is comparable to that of an aircraft. The fuel that we use is sort of a purified form of jet fuel. Jet fuel is a sort of kerosene. Because of our purity requirements the cost per gallon is about twice that of jet fuel, but that's all. So, instead of us paying, say, $2 or 3 per gallon, we pay $5 or 6 a gallon for the fuel. Basically it's a few hundred thousandtwo to three hundred thousand dollars per flight in fuel and oxygen, per mission, vs a $60 million rocket. A pretty giant difference. Yeah, actually, we'veNASA's certainly been a key customer of ours for a few years. The first five years or six years of the company, nobody would talk to us on the government side, NASA or the military, and we got a few sort of fringe customers on the commercial side, that was it. We didn't have any government anything for the first half decade. Then NASA nibbled a little bit and we were able to get a small contract, then we were able to get a much larger contract, and now NASA is a pretty significant supporter. They're about a quarter of our missions, are NASA. They're like our, I mean, they're our anchor customer. Our biggest single customer. The commercial missions are collectively more than NASA. On the military side we've not yet been able towe've not yet been allowed to compete for the primary military contract because Boeing and Lockheed have managed to shut down all competition, but we're close. I think we're getting close. Yeah. Well, people have tried but usually the military industrial complex is able to resist any attack by a newcomer. It's like fighting this giant citadel with very high walls, and usually if a small force attacks a large citadel it is not the citadel that falls.  Well, there's this whole certification process that we've gone through, which iswe're being held to a much higher standard than Boeing and Lockheed were when they actually did their competition. But still, the excuses get harder and harder and thus far all the Falcon 9 missions have been successful, in the ascent phase, so.. the federal law requires competition, it's fundamental, so they can stave off competition for a long time and they have been able to do that, but they won't be able to do it forever, unless we mess up. We have a lot of support in Congress. Initially things likethe people fighting it are in the bureaucracy of the Pentagon and the procurement officers who then go work at Boeing and Lockheed or their prime contractors, which is actually what happened. It's easy to understand from a game theory standpoint because essentially we're asking them to award the contract to a company where they're probably not going to get a job, against the company where their friends are. So they've gotta go against their friends and their future retirement program. This is a difficult thing to expect. Yeah, we have all bipartisan in Congress which is pretty great because the lobbying power of Boeing and Lockheed is particularly wide, it’s really huge.  Yeah. If this were just a matter of lobbying power we would have no chance. I’m not sure what the combined Boeing and Lockheed lobbying forces are, but if they were to send them all out at once the sky is dark. I mean, it’s a swarm. They have entire buildingsyou can see it as you go into DC with all, ya know. We’ve got half of one floor. So it has required a lot of effort from me and from other people at SpaceX and it’s just to find people in Congress who are ideologically motivated and who aren’t swayed by lobbying or only perhaps a little bit swayed. “Ya know, John McCain spent a lot of time in a prisoner of war campone would think he’s not easily intimidated.” He’s reallyhe thinks this is a crazy issue because here we have the taxpayers paying three times more for a rocket. I mean, Boeing and Lockheed make decent rockets but three times more is really crazy, and then the main engine is Russian and the engine maker is majority owned by the Kremlin, directly, there’s not even a fig leaf between. So, why are we sending hundreds of millions of taxpayer money to fund the Russian war machine? In the interests of national security, we’re sending hundreds of millions of dollars to a country that is doing terrible things and certainly not acting in our best interests. This makes no sense, it’s like a Joseph Heller novel. Ya know, it’s so crazy. There’s some discussions underway, I think this week and next in DC, so we’ll see how it goes. The justice department is the one defending the defense department. They shouldn’t be defending the defense department, this is crazy, they should care about justice. “In fact, at one point the judge actually had to remind the justice department lawyer that he works for the American people, not Boeing and Lockheed.” Yeah, it’s not making any sense.  I think just taking a look at the missions that were awarded without any competition and saying which of those should be open to competition. That doesn’t mean that SpaceX will win, that simply means that we will have an opportunity to compete. This is sort of like where the true absurdity comes in, which missions should no company have an opportunity to compete? Well, the law says, actually all the missions should be subject to competition and there may be some that we’re unable to do or our track record is not sufficient or some reason that we can’t complete it, but that would cause us to fall out of the competition. The crazy thing is not having a competition at all. In terms of what would make us happy, I don’t know, some increase.. at least a few missions that are taken out of the not-competed and put into the let’s-compete-them category. I mean, let us compete and lose, that’s fine. We’re hopeful, but I honestly don’t know what to expect. It’s difficult to say. It’s a complement of course, I suppose, if all of our competitors are ganging up against us. Certainly I think there’s some strange bedfellows there.  I believe they’re pretty different. Blue Origin is kind of a startup, small high tech culture vs the staid big aerospace companies. That they had Blue Origin, sort of come out of the blue. I mean, I would be surprised ifI don’t think Blue Origin understands just how stringent the defense department requirements are for an engine. They’re really pretty intense. They’re in for a surprise on that front. Frankly, I don’t mind. I think that companies should just get together and compete as best they can. Totally cool, just let it be a fair game. That all, have a fair game, level playing field, may the best company or group of companies win. That ultimately serves the best interests of, in this case, the taxpayer. Yes, absolutely. They get huge sums of money and it’s extremely difficult to compete, but essentially ULA has decided that they’re afraid even of an unfair competition. “They don’t want a fair competition. They don’t even want an unfair competition. They want no competition at all.”  Yeah, I guess, they’re afraid that we’ll take some of the huge gravy train they have exclusive access to, or that it’s not going to be as big. The truth is they’ll still be the primary supplier for a long time. We’re just talking about taking some portion of that, and I think, even in the very long term, the defense department is likely to want to retain two companies. They’re not going to want to have a single rocket family. With ULA they have the Atlas and the Delta rocket families. It used to be Boeing and Lockheed competing and thenI don’t know if you know the back storybut there was all sorts of shenanigans andlike, Boeing stole thousands of documents from Lockheed and used those in their competition against Lockheed and Lockheed found out. I mean, these guys have a pretty bad track records here of really bad behavior. Like, the Boeing CFO went to jail for bribing the top Air Force procurement officer and they had been doing so for years. I don’t know if you know the Darleen Druyun situation. “So, it’s not paranoia or made up, people did time in the big house. You can pretty much bet that’s the tip of the iceberg.” The Air Force did a thorough investigation and concluded that was the only oneit was only her. Yeah, we certainly have people from the Air Force and from Lockheed and Boeing. About a third of the company comes from the traditional aerospace industry.  We’re just over 4000. We were quite a bit less in previous years. We are. That’s actually what we’re going to announce on Friday. It’s been floating around.. We’re creating an engineering center in Seattle. It’s actually a satellite office creating satellites. We’ll have a soft opening and then we’ll have the big announcement on Friday. “We’re going to try to do for satellites what we’ve done for rockets.” See if we can make similar improvements in the satellite arena.  It’s going to be fairly significant. Ultimately several hundred people, maybe a thousand people. So, it’s big. At the start maybe up to 60 people.  Maybe three or four years.  Yeah, exactly.  and also people from Boeing and others, so we expectit’ll primarily be satellites but we’ll alsoif there’s really excellent people who want to work on rockets but for family reasons or just refuses to live in L.A.a lot of people refuse to live in L.A., then they can work at the Seattle office. Yeah, we might join them. Most satellites are really quite primitive. You kinda think that satellite technology would be really advanced but if you look at how the big satellites are done, all the geostationary stuff, they really want something that’s flight proven or that’s space proven. So, if you start your design process saying you want proven technology, it’s not going to be new technology. So then you design it with, essentially old technology, it takes a while to build that design and then you’ve got to go launch the design and so by the time the satellites is actually launched they’re typically really outdated technologylike 5 to 10 years oldand then if we’re talking about a geostationary satellite that’s up there for 15 years, by the end of its life it’s a quarter of a century old technology. In terms of electronics it’s super-ancient stuff. But people, because they go with the Battlestar Gallactica strategy of packing everything into one giant satellite they’re petrified that if anything goes wrong their whole business could collapse, you end up with old technology. If you instead go with smaller satellites that you launch more frequently you can use present day technology, or even cutting edge stuff that isn’t even necessarily in the hands of consumers, take a chance on the satellite not working but since we’re launching frequently and testing it out frequently we can verify that it’s going to work in space and actually have technology that’s a decade or sometimes two decades more advanced.The optimization in the case of Falcon 1 was really in terms of a cost per flight to orbit. So it wasn’t a cost per unit mass optimization, it waswhat is the smallest useful vehicle that we can build and deliver satellites on. It was clear that was at least a 1000 pounds to LEO and we ended up exceeding that, going to about 1500 pounds. Total cost per launch is about $6.5 million, all in. Both stages are LOX/Kerosene. One note is that the first stage is intended to be reusable, it comes back via parachute to a water landing. The pricing does not include any assumptions for reusability. I’m actually fairly confident that reusability will work, provided the parachute opens. I mean… I think, if the parachute opens, I don’t think the sea water is going to hurt the rocket. If you see what it goes through on the test stand, and on the launch pad, where it gets deluged with high pressure water. At our test stand in Texas we’ve had sleet, snow, rain that’s hitting you sideways at 35 mph, extremely high winds. So, I think that ifprovided we get it back, I think it will actually require very little refurbishment in order to launch again.The first stage engine, which we call the Merlin, is of modest performance. One of the things that we haven’t tried to do, is try to achieve the highest possible performance. Our goal has been to create something that is a reliable truck, essentially, rather than a Ferrari. We haven’t produced, for instance, a stage combustion super high ISP engine. You need to be pretty good to get to orbit at all, but you don’t really have to push the envelope any further than we’ve pushed it here. Our upper stage engine is also LOX/Kerosene, and a somewhat similar architecture to the first stage engine, except that it doesn’t have a turbo pump, and it’s a low pressure engine.The Falcon 1 development has really been winding down now for the past several months, and essentially is almost complete at this point. The development focus for about the past year has been more of the Falcon 5 which is our medium lift vehicle. It has engine-out capability, so you can lose any one of the main engines and still make it to orbit. I think that’s actually a very important principle. Given that almost all airliners have multiple engines. So, if you lose an engine you don’t go down, and jet turbines are far more reliable than rocket engines. So, if that principle makes sense for jet turbines, it really makes sense for rocket engines. We expect to be able to accommodate up to a five meter fairing as well. So, it’ll have reallywe’ll be able to put some really big stuff up there.What is the throw weight of Falcon 5 to Mars? Well, it depends on which trajectory… the zero C3 number, as I recall, is about 1200 kg, something like that. Yeah, it’s like a ton. A little over a ton. Basically, it’s about as capable as the Delta II Heavy is that sent the Mars exploration rovers there. So, anything that Delta II could throw to Mars, Falcon 5 could throw to Mars. “You know, couldn’t really send people.. if they were alive.” We’ll need something much bigger than that, but you could certainly do robotic missions.We don’t like to disclose too much ahead of time, becausewell, it’s more a question of sounding credible more than anything else, we’d like to get some things accomplished before we claim we’re going to do other things, but the plan is to do a vehicle which is in the class of Delta IV after Falcon 5 and you could apply, sort of, a common booster core approach to that and, ya know, encompass the entire range of the EELV capabilities. Up to about 60,000 pounds to orbit, maybe a little beyond that. I can say that we’ll be announcing something fairly significant later this year, as far as much more lift capability that is currently represented, but ideally I’d like to have Falcon 1 launched before we make any big announcement in that direction, but you can expect that, from a strategy standpointcall it the 7-11 strategy, we’re going small, medium, large and extra large, or big gulp or whatever it is.. super big gulp. Falcon 1’s obviously small, Falcon 5’s medium, we’ll have a large and an extra large.Range related stuff is probablyall regulatory stuff combined is, I’d say, at most 25% of the costit’s material, ya know, and significant, but it’s probably 20% to 25% of the total cost associated with both development and launch.The ablative portion is actually really cheap, it costs less than one of our main valves on the engine. I don’t want to give away really detailed, proprietary numbers, but I can say it’s really de minimis. It costs us more to hire the tugboat to go out there than it does to replace the ablative.As far as the actual launch date, we think we’ll be ready to go as soon as the Titan IV departs, which is currently scheduled to be around mid-July. There’s a contingency there both on the Titan IV rocket as well as the payload, which is a class 5 payload. They won’t give you specifics when there’s classified stuff involved. We expect, assuming that they launch in mid-July, we expect that the range would give usbecause the range has to assign a launch date to uswe assume the range would assign a launch date that is within two or three weeks of the Titan IV departure. So, therefore, if Titan IV leftbasically, say August would be a good bet. As far as Kwajalein, that’s actually going very well, we have our own little island there called Omelek.We expect to have that launch site active and ready to do something with in the late August time frame. So, if Titan IV gets significantly delayed then we’ll go out of Kwajalein, and we expect to actually have two rocketsone at Vandenberg and one at Kwajalein, possibly on the pad at the same time.Actually, “we try not to tell anyone outside the space business that it’s for a rocket, because they assume rockets are made of magic.” If you tell them it’s for a rocket, they go like well, ‘I don’t think I’m quite good enough to do something for a rocket,’ and we’re like, ‘no it’ll be fine.’ So, we generallythere are some aerospace suppliers that do do a good job of.. I’d say Mirada Valves does a good job for example. Spin craft does a good job of spinning domes. I don’t want to paint all aerospace suppliers with the same negative brush. I think there are definitely some good ones out there, but generally we find that if you want something cheap, fast and that’s probably going to work, then you should use a regular commercial supplier. If you want something that’s expensive, takes a long time and might work, use an aerospace supplier.We don’t want to be the ones begging to use facilities, so if we’re going to use a NASA facility then that NASA facility has to behave like we’re the customer. If they don’t behave like we’re the customer then we’re not going to work there. If we have to justify why we want to work there, we’re definitely not going to work there. I think, just for pace of execution reasonsbecause there’s also a lot of paperwork involved with using NASA facilities, we’ve chosen to use our own facilities, but I think, like I said, for big stuff or where it’s one-of-a-kind test facilities, that’s probably where we’ll tend to work with NASA.We're planning to do a Dragon v2 abort test where Dragon v2 will take off from, essentially launch vehicle height, so it simulates something going wrong on the launch pad. The astronauts are just about to take off, it's maybe a few seconds before liftoff, and there's a fire on the launchpad, you need to make sure that the spacecraft can fire the SuperDracos, get to a safe altitude, and then take the astronauts to safety. That test is due to occur later this year, then next year we expect to do what's called the high altitude abort test. That's where we launch the rocket, it's at a very high altitude, very quickly, at something called Max-Q which is the maximum dynamic air pressure, and then we want to initiate an abort. This is considered the hardest time to do an abort. Obviously, these are tests, so they could go wrong. That high altitude abort test is due to occur next year. Conceivably we could do the first flight to orbit, and we'd initially do it without people, at the end of next year, and then the first flight with people, in 2016 we think is very achievable.I don't think we need to send any monkeys. One funny littleeven with Dragon version one, we actually do have a moderate life support system in Dragon version one, and sort of a fun thing that I think is happening on the next mission to the space station is that we're going to be carrying 40 mice. The mousetronaut mission is going to be happening fairly soon. With Dragon version two, we'll actually test the life support system, so even when it's unmanned we'll simulate the output of a person. So, like the CO2 output and the water vapor and what-not, will all be simulated. We'll have crash test dummies and that kind of thing, but in terms of the first people, I think approximately two years from now.I think we're in somewhat of an ignominious situation here. It's not really the fact that Russia is taunting the United States, for lack of manned access to space, but they're also massively overcharging. I think it's gone even above $70M, I think it's sort of $76M/seat that the Russians are charging. The quote that we've provided NASA would allow the cost per astronaut to be potentially less than $20M, and that assumes a low flight rate. In a high flight rate it could potentially get to the single digit millions.I think it iswe are in a very questionable situation that a lot of the national security launches being done by United Launch Alliance dependent upon Russian engines and the Russian deputy prime minister is threatening to withhold those engines. Which, obviously, is not a good position to be in. I think, from a SpaceX standpoint, we stand ready to support the US air force and intelligence missions with our Falcon 9 rocket and we look forward to launching a lot of satellites for the defense department and the intelligence agencies and eliminating that Russian dependency.I'd first like to say that I think, on balance, we have a great relationship with the air force. I think we have some strong differences of opinion with a few individuals, but with the vast majority of the air force we have very good relations.Long term, we really want to get to the point where there can be thousands of space flights a year, and ultimately where we can have a base on the Moon and a base on Mars and become a multi-planet species and a true spacefaring civilization. That's where things need to go in the long term.The thing that got me to start SpaceX was that I was disappointed that we'd not made progress beyond Apollo. There was this incredible dream of exploration that was ignited with Apollo and it seemedit just felt as though the dream had died. Year over year, we did not see improvements in rocket technology and I kept expecting that we'd send people to Mars, that we'd have a base on the Moon and that the things that were projected in science fiction movies and books would come true, and they unfortunately did not. Even before starting SpaceX, I can tell you like my goal was to figure out how do we increase the NASA budget in order to make that happen. As I learnt more I discovered that unless we improve rocket technology, it's just not going to matter. We might do a small number of missions but that's not the thing that really changes Human destiny, the thing that really makes the big difference to humanity's future is, are we a spacefaring civilization? Are we a multi-planet species? That's the thing that makes all the difference in the world, because eventually, there will be something that happens on Eartheither a man-made or a natural calamity and humanity's history will fundamentally bifurcateare we going to be the multi-planet species that is out there among the stars, or will be one of perhaps the many single planet species that never went anywhere and just eventually something terrible happened and that caused the end of that civilization.My dream of space is that humanity becomes a multi-planet species. That we'd have a self-sustaining civilization on Mars and perhaps on the Moon and elsewhere in the solar system. Once you have that established, I think over time, that would create a forcing function for the continued improvement in spaceflight technology and eventually we'd even go beyond our solar system. To me, that's a really exciting, inspiring future and it's one to which we should aspire.In terms of thousands of flights per year, I think probably 20 years.. for thousands of flights. I think we can probably get to the hundreds of flights level in about 12 to 15 years.The biggest technology challenge for Dragon version two was the SuperDraco engine. That's an engine that has to produce a tremendous amount of thrust and yet be very light. It's also got to throttle over a wide rangefrom a very low throttle range, to a very high throttle range. It's got to be able to react very quickly. It was quite a tricky thing to develop. We are essentiallywe're almost complete with that development.It's really hard to reduce a complete rocket development program to a few soundbites.One of the technologies that was really critical to the development of the SuperDraco engine was the ability to do 3d metal printing, because it is quite a complex engine and was very difficult to form all the cooling channels and the injector head and the throttling mechanism, but being able to print very high strength advanced alloys, I think was crucial to being able to create the SuperDraco engine as it is.I'm extremely confident in the SuperDraco engine. In fact, we've designed it to be super robust.There's certainly a reduction of parts count in the SuperDraco engine because it's printed. In the normal way they have to make an engine is you have to machine a whole bunch of separate parts and then try to weld them together and so it makes it heavier, less robust and much more sensitive to make.Who's 3d technology are we using? We're using a variety of printers. We use EOS, SLM and Concept. They're all German by the way. Germany's doing quite well on the 3d printing front.I certainly didn't expect to be unveiling Dragon version two, ya know, looking back to 2008 and we still only had the Falcon 1 rocket and we were at really low stages of practical experience and morale after the second failure of our experimental rocket. Fortunately, things have come along since then but man, that was a super low point and I never expected to be up here on stage talking about version two of our spacecraft that can dock with the space station.It's really difficult to comprehend. I find this a very nice fact of circumstance.With SpaceX, fortunately, we are at positive cash flow and we have been for several years. So, we don't have to go public and unlike the case of, say Tesla and Solar City, SpaceX has a very long term mission. We want to just keep improving our technology until there's a city on Mars. Well, that could take a long time. I think the public markets, I suspect that is beyond their normal time horizon.How many flights can Dragon v2 fly without any refurbishment? We're aiming for ten flights without any significant refurbishment and then the thing that would have to be refurbished is the main heat shield, but that remains to be seen. The heat shield material is called PICA-X version three, which is a phenolic impregnated carbon ablator. With each version we've been able to reduce the amount of recession that occurs in the heat shield. You can think of the heat shield like it's a giant brake pad, basically. The better that material technology gets, the more uses it can go throughjust like a brake pad on a car, eventually it does need to be replaced, but I think we can eventually get up to, maybe, 100 flights or something like that.We're aiming forwhat really matters in terms of the reusable elements of a vehicle, it has to be done rapidly. We want this to be able to fly the same day. So it has to be able to arrive and depart the same day.I'm trying to get back to my home planet, ya know.I think America is probably the only place where this would be possible, for a private company to get this far. We've been able to attract an incredibly talented team at SpaceX. We've got a brilliant team of engineers and technicians that really did the design and construction of this spacecraft. I think that having that critical mass of talent is really what's enabled meif you can call it me, it's not really me, it's other peoplebut I think having that critical mass of technical talent is what has enabled us to get this far... and capital, certainly, I mean, in the case of SpaceX, I think something that was very helpful, coming out of PayPal I had a bunch of capital that I could spend developing rocket technology, even though I had no experience in rockets at all. If I'd tried to get funding from a venture capitalist, they would have been angry that I met with them, probably. Even in the best of circumstances, space is outside the comfort zone of most venture capitalists. Although, a few yearsI think five years after starting the company was when the first venture capital came in. We raised some good partners there, and then about five or six years after the start of the company we started getting support from NASA and in the last several years NASA has really been crucial to our success. In fact, really I think this is something I should have mentioned on-stage, we really would not be where we are today without the help of NASA. That's an important acknowledgement.If we don't win the next NASA contract, we'll do our best to continue the development and still make it happen.I personally don't expect to leave California. Certainly, there are probably things California could do to make it easier to manufacture and do things here, but I think, overall, California has a lot to offer. I think the biggest thing about California is it's got a lot of really talented people. As long as the talented people are in California, I think California will do okay.In terms of lessons learned from Dragon one, there's certainly a lot that we learned in every aspect of the vehiclewhether it's the heat shield technology, the Draco engine technology, orbital maneuvering, de-orbit and trying to achieve a precision reentry path through the high velocity entry, that's quite a difficult thing. Although Dragon version one lands with parachutes, before the parachutes open it actually is executing a very precise guided path with the engines firing during reentry.Over time we expect Dragon version one to be phased out, but we're going to carry both of them in parallel for at least a few years.Something that's worth noting is a lot of what is needed on a rocket or spacecraft is actually software. We actually hire a lot of our best software engineers out of the gaming industry. In fact, for myself, I started off when I was a kidin terms of engineering, I wrote games, that was the thing that I did. I think, in gaming, there's a lot of smart engineering talent doing really complex things. In fact, I think a lot of the algorithms involved in a multi-player online gamecompared to a lot of the math that's involved there, doing a docking sequence is actually relatively straight forward. I'd encourage people who are in the gaming industry to think about joining SpaceX and creating the next generation of spacecraft and rockets. Also, probably, in the future we'll create, like, droids on the surface of Mars and the Moon to do things like an automated propellant depot and that kind of thing. We sort of need those features to have a base on Mars.I think I was just feeling really proud of my team for creating such an incredible piece of technology and also it just felt like here we have a shot to advance space technology and take things to the next level. To some degree, maybe this helps revive the dream of Apollo.Well, cheaper is one way to say it, another way to say it is we're trying to make space accessible to everyone. We want it to be such that if you want to go to orbit or beyond, then you can do so. We want to open up space for humanity, and in order to do that, space must be affordable. I think today is not about those, but there'll be some future stuff. Well, it's certainly tempting to go up soon. I used to do lots of things that were personally risky, but now with kids and responsibilities, I do a lot less of that. I used to have, like a fighter jet and do all sorts of crazy stunts and I was like, I want to see my kids grow up and all that. I have responsibilities. I think it'll probably be a couple of years after the first astronaut crew goes up, maybe four or five years, I suppose. If the first crew flight is in roughly two years, then I'll probably go up a couple of years after that.As far as the soft landing of the boost phase, it was interesting, when we got the corrupted video back, because we really actually had a real difficult time getting the telemetry. In fact, I'll tell you a funny thing. We actually had tobecause normally we get the bulk of the telemetry from a boat. We also have a backup, an AP3 that was going to go up, and the P3 got iced up, the boats couldn't go out, so I sent my plane up with my pilots, and... we had to design and fabricate an antenna that exactly fit in the window of the plane. We started off with a pizza dish and we were able to do a double loop antenna with a pizza dish and point it out the window to get the link. The data came through really well but the video was corrupted because unfortunately when you compress video, it's hard to uncorrupt a compressed video because you actually have to figure out the compression algorithms and all these things, so we weren't able to get very far, but we put the video up online and then we crowd sourced the cleanup of the video and people did a really great job of fixing it. I actually tweeted out a link to the latest thing. Mostly the people on the NASA Spaceflight forum were able to fix the video.Yes, this will land on land. In fact, much like the video you saw. We want to land this back at Cape Canaveral ideally. Initially, we may land it somewhere else, but it's a normal condition landing. Except for emergency landing, all landings will be on land.There was a little bit of water ingress from a pressure relief valve because it got dragged a bit through the ocean, so there was a pressure relief valve that got some water in it. To my understanding, none of the cargo was damaged, so it's okay.The heat shield material is called PICA-X and it's version three. It was initially developed at NASA, the original version of PICA, for the Stardust mission and it's called phenolic impregnated carbon ablator and it's the highest heat flux material known to man. This can take more heat than any other material that anyone has ever developed. It was specifically developed for the Stardust mission, which was coming in from interplanetary velocity and was coming in at such a high speed that normal heat shield materials would not work, so they had to develop something new. We started with that as the base line and created a very tough PICA called PICA-X version one, and then with each successive mission we've experimented with improvements on the heat shield material. So we're now up to version two and we'll be flying version three onversion three of the PICA will be on version two of Dragon. I can't talk about the details of the technology because it's protected by ITAR.It can take essentially seven passengers, if it's in that configuration, and I think, something aroundif you really cram stuff inabout a ton of pressurized cargo and two to three tons of unpressurized cargo.The first crew version will be driven by NASA, I think.  It reallywe will defer to NASA in terms of the first people on-board. If NASA wants us to fly SpaceX test pilots we'll do that, otherwise we'll fly NASA astronauts. It will carry trunk cargo. As I said, it can carry up to a ton of internal cargo too.There’s the temperatures that it will sustain and there’s the temperatures that it could sustain. The proper way to think of a heat shield material is watts per square centimeter and there’s the peak heat flux and the sustained heat flux. The PICA-X version three is capable of over a kilowatt per square centimeter, which is a crazy lot and sustaining that for a long time. It’s really driven not by the recession rate but by the conduction of the heat to the back of the tile where it could potentially damage the heat shield’s support structure. A top temperature, well, I could estimate that pretty well, I’d say about five or six thousand degrees Fahrenheit, something like that. Top speed, it’s going to be coming in at roughly 25 times the speed of sound, as a sort of rough point. It could probably handle twice that kinetic energy, maybe more.Most of what you see here is flight hardware.I’ll give you some precision with respect to costs. In terms of what we’ve bid, it is contingent upon flight rate. If you assume four flights per year…… touch screens, there are four of them in the vehicle, actually two pairs of two, I should say, the great thing about this is you can configure the interface to have a wide range of controls and a wide range of feedback and you can really have an almost infinite amount of information that you can access and any amount of control that you’d like, with a touch screen, as anyone who has used an iPad can attest. The range of things that you can use in that device is really unlimited. In the unlikely event of all the screens being destroyed, the critical functions will be controlled with manual buttons. In terms of manual chute deploy and reserve oxygenbackup system for any kind of life support, that stuff can all be controlled with manual buttons.We will be using Tegras to power the screens. The Tegras power the screens, but not the spacecraft. From a SpaceX standpoint, we expect to be ready to transport crew in 2016about a year sooner than NASA needs it. I think NASA wants to be a little bit cautious about the timing of things. They don’t want to count on us being there by 2016 but we feel fairly confident that the vehicle will be ready in two years. Well, Bob Bigelow I guess, he’s here somewhere I think. You mean the Dragon spacecraft? You mean including version one and everything? Or just version one to version two? So far, it’s probably been $400M or $500M and it’ll probably be that amount more to get through first flight. Something on the order of a billion dollars.For the spacecraft itself, it’s going to be probably something on the order of 70% to 80% NASA funded, but for the rocket it’s not NASA funded at all. The development of Falcon 1 and Falcon 9, all of that, that’s 100% private. If you say, what’s the total cost of development has been, including the rocket and the spacecraft, it’s probably something closer to 50/50 NASA and private.“No, we’re not replacing NASA. NASA is our most important customer.” I think there’s always a role for NASA. There’s always going to be things where there’s no obvious way to commercialize somethingthink of something like the Hubble space telescope or the James Webb, or some of the exploratory probes that go to Mars and elsewhere, it’s always going to be important for NASA to be doing those things because there’s no obvious economic model for those things. I don’t think we could find investors for theman investment means there’s an expectation of return.First of all, I think anythingif you can 3d print something with sufficiently good material properties, then that’s the easiest way to do it. Certainly, in the volumes of a rocket company, it’s harder to make it work for a car company. In the case of the SuperDraco engine, we didn’t in the very beginning anticipate being able to 3d print it. We actually tried a whole bunch of normal methods of making the engine and actually those did not have great success. Then we said, well, let’s give 3d printing a try and see if it’d work. Initially, we thought of it as somewhat of a Hail Mary on the SuperDraco and actually it turned out to work super well.Next launch, I think we’re just double checking everything on the rocket and we expect to probably launch on June 10th or thereabouts. We had a helium leak. Helium is a pernicious little molecule, I’ve got to say.  Well yeah, so here I’ll give you a little bit of a tidbit on the Mars vehicle which will be methane powered. Mars vehicle will be autogenously pressurized with methane and oxygen. So instead of helium pressurizationthere’s no helium on Mars. So, we’ll gasify the liquid oxygen and liquid methane to pressurize their respective tanks. Looking forward to that.  Yes, absolutely. Fully reusable.I’ll take a couple more questions and then I’ll have to bail out.For any kind of low Earth orbit activity you essentially protected by the Earth’s magnetic field, so the radiation that is dangerous is not super greatparticularly for a short flight. We have improved the micrometeorite shielding. When you see the shielding on the outside, it’s actually doing a lot of things. It’s helping protect against high velocity alpha particles coming from the Sun and even other high velocity particles coming in, but it’s also protecting against the heat of reentry and then it also has to be a micrometeorite shield. It’s got better shields.Oh, you’re talking about the electronics. Yeah, absolutely. Bit flips. In fact, even with Dragon version one, technically Dragon version one is Dragon version 1.3 right now, arguably. The avionics of Dragon version one have gone through two major revisions, and on the last flight we saw no anomalies with electronics at all. There were no bit flips that weren’t automatically and instantly corrected by the system. We’ve certainly learnt a lot, although it’s not externally visible, it still looks the same on the outside, the electronics on the Dragons flying now are much more advanced than the first one. NASA is our customer really with Dragon version two. It’d be like someone buys a Model S and we’re not going to be the one who says who drives it. If you buy the vehicle you get to say who’s driving. These will be operated on behalf of NASA.NASA is our single largest customer, but if you look at the missions on our manifest, the NASA missions are, I think, 20% to 25% of our missions on manifest. Call it roughly a quarter of our missions are from NASA. Yeah, I think the FAA just recently, maybe even today, gave the approval for the Texas launch site. So we’re pretty excited about building that now. That’s going to give us redundancy for any Eastern launches. We can reach the space station from Texas. I should say, we would only do so in emergencies, the default path for space station would be 39A, most likely. We could actually, a little harder, but we could reach it from Vandenberg too. It’d be a real coast hugger, but yeah. We’ll actually be doing a lot more missions from Vandenberg, for example the new generation Iridium constellation will be launched from Vandenberg and that’s, I think, at least eight missions. We expect to launch Falcon Heavy from Vandenberg as well. Although it does look like the first Heavywe originally thought the first Heavy would go out of Vandenberg but it’s now looking like the first Heavy will go out of the Cape from 39A.Thank you everyone, and I appreciate you coming.Yeah it was funny, friends of mine went back for a 20th reunion. I’ve been back. I’ve given a couple of talks at Penn.It’s a nice shot, it’s a tall rocket. It’s as skinny as I thought we could possibly make it. We stretched to it as long as ..  Yeah. It’s twelve feet in diameter and when you add little bits and pieces, it gets out to almost 14 feet, and then we have to tuck the little bits and pieces in the corners because the key thing is that the total height above the road has got to be less than 14.5 feet.  Need a boat. Or they’ve got to fly themselves. Not going to fit on the roads, that’s for sure.The hard points where the tanks and the parachutes and everything are mounted, there are these vertical blades that transfer load from the heat shield to the pressurized section. So, that’s one of the factors and they don’t quite line up, so we’d either have to add a lot of mass, so they’d really be symmetric or we could have it not be symmetric and not add extra mass. If the parachutes have deployed, the parachuteslike, do you see these strange lines?  Yes, exactly. Behind the dragon here is where the main chute is, and then the drogues are at the top and you can see those lines basically go from where the drogues are to the mains. Where it’s held, where the parachute lines attach, is just above where the hatch is, and so it actually comes in at an angle. It’ll be coming in through the wind with lateral velocity, and you want the load to be taken up by the legs. You don’t want it to land on one leg, because then one leg is going to take too much load. By having two legs closer together actually helps that too. It sort of takes the initial impact on those two rear legs and then onto the front. Yeah, it’ll look almost identical. We intend it to be a lot smokier, with the scorch marks and all, but it’ll pretty much look like this. I’m really looking forward to that. It should be fun to see it hop around those pads.Umm.. sure. Yeah, that’s about right. Obviously with Model X production ramping up quite heavily in Q4, depending on how that ramp goes, and obviously it’s difficult to predict that with clarity, but our volume essentially doubles in Q4. Depending on how the ramp goesI want to emphasize that because what people don’t entirely appreciate is that there’s several thousand unique parts in a car and if even one of those parts is not availablefor any reasonthen you can not scale production. So, ya know. Essentially the production ramp goes according to the unluckiest worst performing supplier, or part of Tesla, but that said we do expect to see a significant ramp in Q4 for the X and have something that may be as much as two times other quarters in Q4. As far as demand for that, we do not see that being a problem. Obviously there are huge advance orders for the X and we see a steady climb in demand for the S. Yeah, in the case of the X, it ended up being a lot different than the S than we originally anticipated. So the development took a lot longer and we were distracted solving all sorts of issues with the S during that time, which made it difficult for us to allocate engineering resources to the X when there were issues to be solved with the S. I think we’ll do a lot better with the X and we’re paying close attention to some of the things that are different about the X to ensure that they’re not an issue. Particularly the falcon wing door and the second row seats. So I’m feeling pretty good about things, but because that production ramp just scales exponentially, depending on where that exponential curve falls across a quarterly boundary can make quite a significant effect on the production deliveries in that quarter. So that’s whyit’s quite easy to predict if it’s continuous but quite hard if it’s discrete with arbitrary quarterly cut offs. I really think the X is going to be a great car. I just drove the latest prototype today and it’s like, wow. This is by far the best SUV.The Z credits thing is not likeit moves things by like 2%. Ya know, it’s not super-material. I’m still not sure what the point of your question is. You realize Z credits don’t sell for 100 cents on the dollar, they sell for like 50 cents or sometimes less, and there are not always customers for the Z credits. It’s not a big deal. As more of our production goes overseas, obviously there are no Z credits overseas and as our sales increase outside of California, or Canada, those are not Z states. The Z stuff is an increasingly small part of the picture, over time.  Yeah. Yeah. We’ve steadily increased the invitation list. We’ve just found there’s not a lot of interest in people doing pack swaps. So we make the invitations and we get a small percentage of them that actually take us up on the invitations. Yeah, let me just talk more broadly about the response to the Powerwall and Powerpack, because I think that’s really the question you should be asking. The response has been overwhelming, okay, like crazy. In the course of less than a week we’ve had 38,000 reservations for the Powerwall, 2500 reservations for Powerpack. The Powerpack, it should be noted, typically this is bought by utilities or large industrial companiesfor heavy industrial workso typically Powerpack is at least ten Powerpacks per installation. So if there’s 2500 reservations, that’s actually 25,000 Powerpacks. Powerwall, also, we suspect is probably an average of 1.5 to 2 per installation. So 38,000 reservations is more like 50 or 60,000 actual Powerwalls. So thatI mean there’s no way that we could possibility satisfy this demand this year. I mean we’re basically sold out until next year, in the middle of the first week, it’s crazy. We had 2500 requests from companies that want to distribute and install the Powerwall and Powerpack. We can’t even respond to them. This iswe have to, like, triage our response to those who what to be a distributor. So, it’s like crazy off-the-hook. Yeah, and it seems to have gone super viral. For the specific case of Solar City, what they’re referring to is that there’s two versions of the Powerwallthere’s the daily cycling version and there’s the power backup version. One’s energy optimized and one’s daily cycling optimized. For the daily cycling optimized one, the economicsit is true in the US, with rare exceptionare more expensive than utility. So, if somebody wants to do a daily cyclingbasically go off-grid, it’s going to be more expensive than being on-grid. This doesn’t mean that people won’t buy it, because there are people who want to go off-grid on principle or they just want to be independent. That’s what the Solar City comment is about.So, let’s see. Yeah, I suppose everybody for coming and I really appreciate your support and good to see you all. You guys may have heard that I talked a little about the Hyperloop actually. Not exactly a Tesla topic but we’re looking atwe’re going to create a Hyperloop test track, most likely in Texas. We’re probably going to hold an annual student competition to see who can design the pod that can go the fastest in the Hyperloop. So that could be kinda fun.Let’s see, I’m happy to answer questions that you might have. Well, it seem to go pretty well. It seemed to be well received. I was definitely just trying to get support for sellingbeing able to properly sell cars in Texas, as we’re not currently allowed to do, as you guys know, it’s quite convoluted. You have to order it through California, it doesn’t make sense. We’re just looking, fundamentally, for people in Texas to have the right to decide how they want to buy their car. That’s really what we’re aiming for in terms of legislative change.  That might be a bridge too far. Step one, if we can sell the cars properly in Texas, that would be a huge win. Right now we’re essentially selling cars through word of mouth, through you guys, so yeah, thanks for spreading word of mouth. Well, I’m not sure I’ve pulled my punches all that much. I definitely don’t think they make a ton of sense. I did someI tried to explain, like, why is this law still in place? I could understand why it was put there in the first place. The reason is thereit was originally put in place for a just cause, which isthe big car companies were trying to disenfranchise their franchise dealers. Particularly Ford under Jack Nasser put a lot of pressure on the car dealers to sell their franchises back to the corporate parent at a really fire sale low price. So the auto dealers went to the state legislature to seek protection for these nefarious actions and they got that protection but the law was overly broad and prevented even new car companies that were never granted a franchise, that were starting fresh, from being able to sell cars. So now the auto dealers are using a law that was put in place for a just cause, they’re using it for an unjust cause. So, I think it’s just important for the auto dealers to understand the original rationale for the law and why it made sense. Well, that’s actually a great question. With our Dragon spacecraft we’ve really tried to do everything possible to make the astronauts safe. “If somebody can think of something better to do, I’d love to hear it.” I’ll tell you about some important differences of Dragon compared to the prior spacecraft or even compared to the Soyuz, which is quite a reliable vehicle. First of all, the SuperDraco enginesyou can see these thrusters that are side-mounted into the spacecraftthere are eight of them. They provide a redundant escape system, so, if something goes wrong with the rocket these thrusters fire and pull the astronauts away from the rocket. In fact, since there are eight of these engines there can actually be multiple engine failures and still the escape system will work.  Yes. If you go even beyond that and say, let’s say the engines failthere’s a total propulsion system failurewe actually have a redundant parachute system on-board with dual drogues and three main chutes. I mean, it’s like ridiculouslyI mean, from a design standpoint I’m not sure what more one could do. It’s got, like, multiple engines, multiple parachutes. “I mean, space is a dangerous thing.” It’s not something thatyou know, humans didn’t evolve to be spacefaring creatures, but in as much as one can make certain design decisions to make a spacecraft safe, we’ve endeavored to make those decisions, and I’m at a loss to think of anything more that we could do, and if we can think of something more, we’ll do it. Well, I don’t want to be complacent, or presumptuous about the contract. I think we’ve done everything we can to have this be a good design and I think we’ve shown to NASAwho’s been an awesome supporter of SpaceX in the past. Frankly, we wouldn’t be where we are today without NASA. I think we’ve shown that we can do a good job and hopefully that makes a difference for this competition. Actually, the NASA competition, really will be independent of any Congressional influence. My experience with NASA is that they really are very objective. Frankly, if NASA wasn’t so objective then we would not have won any of our earlier contracts because we would have been out-lobbied by the big aerospace companieswho have far more resources than we do. The reason I wanted to bring Dragon to Washington DC was really to show key Congressmen where US tax dollars would be going. At the end of the day, they are the ones controlling the purse strings for a competition, in general. So, they’re not deciding the winners but they are deciding, is the amount of money allocated to a commercial human spaceflight programis it going to be well spent? Does it have a chance of success? “Ya know, there’s a lot of people who think that human spaceflight should not be allowed in the commercial sector. It’s sort of an odd position I think, but there’s still a lot of people who feel that way.” So, Congress need to think, okay, well, if this taxpayer money is spent, does it seem like it would have a good outcome, and seeing it in person is just a lot more convincing than seeing it on paper. I don’t know. I don’t know if we’ll win. In the long term, I have faith in the American system of government and I think in the long term we’ve got a good shot. In the short to medium term, it’s much harder to say where things are going, and of course, in order to get to the long term we’ve got to get through the short to medium term. I just find it odd that we have to fight so hard just for there to be competition for national security launches. It just doesn’t feel right.What questions can I answer? It is not practical to carry an extra battery pack in an electric vehicle. So for the battery pack swap there would have to be some kind of swap station. However if you have a 300 mile range car, you're really not talking about a lot of swap stations. You just need say one between LA and San Francisco. And then there's the question as to whether people will want to swap battery packs rather than simply park their car at a highway rest stop, grab a meal or a coffee, hit the restroom, come back in 20 or 30 minutes and you're recharged enough to complete the journey. I think most people will probably do that. But we wanted to preserve the optionality of a fast pack swap just in case there were people in a hurry. Right, so Better Place actually got the idea for battery pack swapping from Tesla, when Shai Agassi came and visited. We told him that we were going to incorporate battery pack swapping, and he was like 'Oh, good idea' So yeah. Not that I think it's a genius moveyou have cellphones and laptops that have battery packs that swap. But we're not currently working with Better Place. Not that we don't like them or anything, but we don't see any technical advantage or anything to working with them. It is not obvious how we'd make the consumer experience better with Better Place. Well, it's sort of on the order of 1000 pounds of propellant that you need to expend to land propulsively.Well, the rocket booster is what delivers you to a parking orbit, then you use a little bit of propellant to maneuver over to the space station, then depart from the space station, initiate a deorbit burn, control your reentry during the descent phase. In total there's about 3000 pounds of propellant, so you use maybe 1000 in terms of getting to the space station and departing and deorbiting, about 1000 on landing, and you'd have probably 1000 spare, roughly speaking. Now if there were something unusual that happened like you had to temporarily abort an approach to the Space Station, then you might use another 500 pounds of propellant or something like that. We will actually still have parachutes as an emergency on Dragon. So you test the engines at say a couple miles of altitude, make sure they're working, if they're not then you deploy the emergency parachutes. Kinda like the Cirrus aircraft . It's not yet in production On a go-forward basis, most of the engineering is done. We're at the 90% engineering complete stage right now. The factorywe were fortunate in being able to purchase the NUMMI factory in California which was jointly owned by Toyota and GM, although in recent years it's only been making Toyota products. It's where they made the Carolla and the Tacoma. So we were able to buy at a very good price a great factory, and thus minimize the incremental tooling cost to produce the Model S. So there's an existing paint shop, so we only have to modify a paint shop instead of building one from scratch. There's stamping machines and all sorts of things there that are helpful.The two biggest milestones this year I think probably getting our stamping line operational, to stamp the aluminum body for the aluminum body panels. The Model S is actually going to be the only aluminum car made in North America. The Audi A8 and a few of the advanced German cars are aluminum, but currently there are no aluminum passenger vehicles made in the United States. Although for me, coming from the space arena, it's like, 'obviously you'd make it out of aluminum. What else would you make it out of?' Steel is really heavy and not great.And then the second thing is the paint shop. Painting a car is actually really difficult, if you want to get a spectacular paint job. And we're aiming for something which we call a 'piano finish,' like the kind you'd see on a grand piano. Something that's noticeably better than any other car. So that's a high bar, particularly to do so without adding a lot of cost to the process. So we're optimistic that we'll get maybe not all the way there, but most of the way there. Those are the big production milestones this year.I'm not getting a lot of hands. Somebody way in the back of the room There will certainly be issues that we have to deal with. But by less than one percent, I mean less than one percent annihilation of humanity. Even if we do massively increase the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere, it is unlikely to result in the annihilation of humanity. It could kill a few hundred million people due to rising sea levels and that kind of thing, which is obviously not good, but it's not an annihilation event. But if you look at the fossil history, there have been several annihilation events, mostly due to meteors of one kind or another, possibly some due to supervolcanoes, and some due to who knows what.So we obvious suffer from some risk of a similar annihilation event, and potentially something man made like a supervirus. It could be something like with the CERN Large Hadron Collider potentially could see a press release saying, 'the good news is we've discovered a new law of physics. The bad news is there's a small black hole that's rapidly growing.' Now I think that's extremely unlikely, to be clear, but you know, we've discovered new laws of physics before. Well, I'm not a venture capitalist. People sometimes think I am a venture capitalist, but actually I am... uhh, I am an engineer. So when I apply capital it is to my own companies, and occasionally to the companies of close friends of mine, where I do zero due dilligence and I just basically invest on the basis that I think they're good and likely to succeed. So I'm not the guy to pitch on ideas to be funded, because that's what a venture capitalist does. It's better to pitch a venture capitalist. Well, I suppose if it were to help the space program. I would be quite surprised if that were the case. But it's possible, yeah. It would look a little bit different, but not that much. My view on reuseability is you have to take the first stage basically has to turn around, re-light its engines, boost back to the launch pad, and land propulsively. It's tricky,  it's very doable.And the second stage, the second stage is harder because you're pound for pound trade-off with payload. Any mass that you addin terms heat shield or reentry systems, is directly subtracted from the amount you can put into orbit. Whereas the first stage is anywhere from a 5:1 to 10:1 ratio. So you add 10 pounds of mass and it takes away one pound of payload. And there's also a lot more you have to do with the second stage. You need a much more significant heat shield, you have to de-orbit the stage, control it during reentry, it's got to have some lift-over-drag so that you can steer back to the launch site, and then you've got to either propulsively land or perhaps use a parafoil or something like that. All those things cost mass.But that's kinda how I think it can and should be done. That basic architecture is what we're going to try to do. The trick is to do it with- just very mass efficiently. You've only got that three, maybe three and a half percent of mass to play with, and you want to try to get say 2 percent of your liftoff mass to orbit. So that only leaves about one and a half percent for everything else, which is not much. Yeah, I think long term you'd see that sort of thing. And maybe even in the initial phase. It kind of depends on whether the United States builds a super heavy lift or not, like a Saturn V class vehicle. If you have a Saturn V class vehicle you don't need to do on-orbit assembly. If you have something smaller than that then you do if you want to go to Mars. So it kind of depends on how things unfold in that direction. I think it would be great to have a super heavy lift vehicle. If it's done in the typical government way I think it will not come to fruition, because of massive schedule overruns and massive cost overruns. So it really depends on whether NASA decides to take a commercial approach to super heavy lift, if there will be super heavy lift and obviate the need for on orbit construction.And you know, when there's a lot of traffic between Earth and Mars I would expect there'd be some large space cruiser that's circulating between Earth and Mars, and you just take a small shuttle craft up to the space cruiser if you will, and the space cruiser gets refueled from Earth or from Mars. But that's a long term optimization, and it would be driven by a lot of traffic occurring between the two planets. Well I think it's generally good. Well NASA's our biggest customer for SpaceX, so they certainly are huge on the customer front. About 40% of our launches are for NASA. They haven't- they did pay for demonstration flights, so they were sort of a quasi-funder, but it was specifically for their needs. So it wasn't just sort of, 'here is some money, do what you want,' it's, 'we have this specific need. We'll pay you as you demonstrate milestones in that direction.'In the case of Tesla we were fortunate enough to receive a government loan last year, which was unrelated to the bilout. Unfortunately it was announced at the same time as the bailout, so people assumed it was somehow bailout, but the loan we received was actually part of a program that was initiated in 2007 in boom times, and one of the requirements of that loan program was that you had to be a viable entity in your own right, and provide 20-30% of private capital as a matching contribution. Which therefore excluded for example GM and Chrysler, who were bankrupt. So Ford, Nissan, and Tesla did receive essentially lines of credit, which in our case were specifically related to the engineering and production costs of the Model S. So it was certainly helpful from a capital dilution standpoint. If we repay the loan early then there's no capital dilution, but if we don't repay the loan early then the U.S. Government gets a bunch of stock warrants in Tesla. So in the grand scheme of things of all the various government deals that are done, I think this is one of the smarter ones. There will be many sources of electricity that are sustainable. Wind, geothermal, hydro... but my personal view is that we'll generate more electricity from solar than any other single source. It may not be a majority, but I expect at least a plurality from solar power. That will be a combination of photovoltaics at the point of usethe roofs of houses and businesses, which is also good from the standpoint of not requiring additional power lines. And then at the power plant level I think we'll see a lot of solar thermal generation. Where essentially you're just using the sun to heat a working fluid, and then steam and power a turbine. There are a bunch of those projects that are going to come online in California and other places in the united states soon.And if you think of solar power, beyond humanity's need for electricity, the Earth is almost entirely solar powered. The entire weather system is solar powered, almost the entire weather system is solar powered, some of it is from Earth rotation. All precipitation is solar powered. The only reason we're not a frozen dark ice ball at four degrees kelvin is because of the sun. The whole ecosystem is solar powered. Plants are essentially a solar powered chemical reaction. So really we're just talking about replacing this itty-bitty thing called electricity and having that also be solar powered. That was the intent That was the whole idea.No, I don't think so. Like I said, the whole purpose of Tesla was to draw the car industry into electric cars. So I'm- the more electric car programs more I see announced the happier I am. The success of Tesla as a company financially is going to be a function of the quality of the products that we produce. So we have to make better cars than, say, GM and Chrysler. I don't see that as a huge challenge. laughThe sad thing is that generally in the United States, if someone can afford an expensive car, they do not buy an American car. And I think it's- I think in the 60s the U.S. made great cars, and before that made great cars, but then something happened in the 70s. I don't know what happened. A lot of bad things... architecture went to hell, fashion was questionable, and our cars turned to shit. As a friend of mine summarized, the Tesla strategy long term is to make cars that don't suck.So I think we'll be ok. There's some vindication in that Toyota, which is the the largest car company in the world and the leader in hybrids is an investor and partner with Tesla. If it was easy, they would simply do it themselves and not bother to partner with us. Daimler was the inventor of the internal combustion engine car, and the maker of Mercedes and Smart, and again they would not ask us to be a supplier to then nor would they be an investor in Tesla if they thought it was a simple matter to replicate what we are doing. No, aluminum is great. The Audi A8 is an aluminum car. All the airplanes you fly are mostly aluminum. Aluminum is a little harder to work with in terms of bonding and joining. It's harder to weld than steel for example. So it's technologically more difficult to work with, but it's a superior metal for anything that weight is important. That's why planes are not made of steel. In fact, the Model S, our design target is to meet five star crash rating by 2012 standards, which are higher than... a car that's five star by 2010 standards is only a three star by 2012 standards. So we have a very high bar we're aiming for from a safety standpoint. And obviously I'll be driving the car, my friends will be driving the car, our beloved shareholders will be driving the car, so safety is extremely important. I don't think there will be a safer car on the road.Oh sorry. So the price, it's kind of like the 5-series BMW, so depending upon configuration it would vary from about $50,000 to about $100,000. I generally think that there's been a bit too much outsourcing in general. Both outsourcing out of California and outsourcing out of the United States. Businesses sometimes tend to be a little sort of fad-y. For a very long time there was a very strong outsourcing fad. But I don't think people really looked at the fundamentals in a lot of cases when they outsourced. Particularly when the technology is developing rapidly, it's important to have a very tight iteration loop between engineering and production, so as soon as you design something you can bring it to production right away. And the the engineers can go on the floor and see the mistakes that they've made, the production people can talk to engineers and say, 'here are some good ideas,' and so you can evolve the product and get to a better design solution faster. I think this is an important thing that's often overlooked. At SpaceX our rockets are lower cost than the Chinese, the Indians, anyone else, and that's before reuseability is taken into account. I think it's largely because of that tight iteration loop.And in the case of Tesla, the Freemont plant, the NUMMI plant, until April 1st of last year they made the Corolla there which is a $17,000 car. So if it was fundamentally too expensive to operate in California, how could they make a $17,000 car? So I think in California we do need to be cautious about adding more and more costs to living here. I do think we're close to- we're on the cusp of a tipping point, I think if the taxes start getting much higher than they are- in California the marginal tax rate is 11%, you could go to say Washington and pay 0%. So it's an expensive place to live. I like living in California. So I'm here, but I know many people people who have moved out because the taxes are too high, or workers comp and other costs are too high. California does tend to over-regulate a bit. So I think generally California is going to have a real tough thing to do, which is it's got to cut the cost of what it spends on the state level, and maybe even reduce the taxes a little bit to be competitive with other states, and deregulate. Those are the things that could be done to increase employment in California. Politically these are difficult things to do, and I'm not entirely sure how California gets out of this bind. It might have to be a proposition or something, because the legislature seems to be unable to arrive at anything sensible. No, no material limitation in space. Silicon, don't worry about silicon from a limitation standpointthere's lots of silicon. Copper is probably OK too. There's quite a lot of copper in the world. For battery packs, one of the challenges we had was cobalt actually, cobalt is only available in a few places in the world, it's quite expensive, and one of the biggest source is the Congo, which tends to vary in its political stability. That's why going to the Model S we changed the chemistry to require only about a quarter as much cobalt, and thus reduce the cost of the battery pack, and also increase the energy of the pack.If you're going to worry about any material shortages, maybe some rare Earth elements are maybe a concern. China has a huge concentration of rare Earth elements which are used in permanent magnet motors. To avoid that issue, well actually there are other reasons as well, but Tesla uses an electric motor design that doesn't use any rare Earth elements. I wouldn't worry about it too much on the commodity front, except on the non-reusable commodities like oil and that type of thing. By the way, oil's gonna go way way way up, if anyone's wondering. I'm not too worried about recharging stations. The great thing about electricity is that it's really ubiquitous. There are more power outlets than anything. There are more power outlets than access to any other kind of power by orders of magnitude. In the case of Tesla and most of the new electric cars that are coming out, the charger is built into the car so you can charge it anywhere. If you want to charge fast, you're going to need a high power outlet. What we're seeing with use of the Roadster is that almost all charging happens at home. Ninety percent plus.Now it is important that you’ve got to have a range that’s reasonable. So if you’ve got a 50 mile range, then you can’t do a lot of round trips. 25 miles is your max, and you’re being really sporting if you do that. As you reduce the range, you start to require a lot of charging stations, but as you increase the range the number of charging stations you need tends to drop with the square of the range. So you’ve got a circle you can travel in, so the bigger that circle is the fewer recharging stations you need. For something like the Tesla Roaster, you only need one charging station between LA and San Francisco. It’s a 400 mile trip, you’ve got 250 miles of range, so you need one charge station. But if you have a 50 mile range you’d need probably 10 charging stations. 8-10 charging stations. So I think you’ll really only see a lot of useful charging stations, at least as far as Tesla cars are concerned, on the interstates. So when you’re making really long distance trips, that kind of thing. But otherwise not a lot. In the case of SpaceX, unfortunately the supply chain in the rocket business is very shallow. Very often there’s only one supplier, and it’s a very expensive supplier, and they’re really not designed for reuseability, so you’re screwed if you don’t make it yourself basically, for the most part. So that’s lead to SpaceX being maybe 70-80% of the rocket being built in-house, literally from raw material. I guess another way to look at it is, to the degree that you inherit the legacy components, you inherit the legacy cost structure and limitations. So it’s not from any sort of religious bias toward insourcing, but rather on the fundamentals we were driven to do that. In the case of Tesla the automotive supply chain is much better. It’s much more competitive, there are many suppliers for any given component, and so maybe 40-50% of the Tesla Model S is insourced. You mean use parts that are in our rocket in something else that they’re doing? Not yet. There have been a few inquiries about using our engines in some other programs, which we’ve responded to, and it could happen that our engines are used in some other government programs. We do. Yeah. Just to distinguish between heavy list and super heavy lift, because there are rockets like our Falcon Heavy, there’s the Delta IV Heavy, and these are on the order of- in the case of the Delta IV Heavy it’s maybe 25 tons to orbit, in the case of Falcon 9 Heavy it’s maybe 30, 35 tons to orbit. But compared to the Saturn V, which was over 100 tons to orbit, there’s a pretty big difference there. So generally we call that super heavy, in the 100 ton plus class. SpaceX would really like to build a super heavy, and I think we could do it for a small fraction of what what people think it would cost. “I’ve gone on record as saying I think we could do a super heavy development for on the order of two and a half billion, other estimates are about 10 times that. And the super heavy that I’m alluding to would have about a 160 ton to orbit capability, so way more than a Saturn V. In fact, I’ve even gone as far as to say that I will guarantee that personally. And stake everything on SpaceX that it will happen. So, I mean we’ll see.”There are strong political forces that don’t want us to do that, so I’m trying to eliminate any argument that they could have for not at least allocating a small portion of the super heavy lift funding to give us a shot at making it work. They can take all the rest of the super heavy lift funding and apply it to the traditional way, we will take the sort of 10-20% of that number on a fixed milestone basis so if we don’t achieve the milestone, we don’t get paid, and I will personally guarantee it. So if we don’t achieve the milestones then that money can then be applied to the other programs, so it’s a no-lose proposition. But logic does not always prevail. I think Tesla will be ok. Actually on balance the federal government has been helpful to Tesla. In the space arena… Man, this is a complicated situation. Out of budget necessity, NASA has gone commercial as far as cargo transport is concerned. And then last year President Obama said, ‘we should also outsource astronaut transport to commercial entities. If we can fly Boeing airliners and Airbus airliners and feel good about that, then why can’t our spacecraft be built by commercial entities too?’ There was a battle royale last year against that, which won by a 3% margin in the House of Representatives. That was a hairy battle. But it is moving in that direction. It’s kind of unavoidable. It’s going to be that or nothing. So I think it’s going to be that. So overall I’m pretty optimistic about it. I probably worry slightly more about, in the space arena, about some of the big government contractors. They would definitely like to see SpaceX die. I’m sure I am being tortured in effigy right now. You know when you see a movie, and there’s the bad corporation in the movie that’s like the big defense contractors. Those are our competition in a lot of cases.I’ll take a couple more questions, and then… Yeah, that’s happened many times. Actually, we didn’t start out insourcing 70-80% of our hardware. Initially we thought, ‘well, we’ll try to do as little as possible,’ but then over time we just insourced more and more out of necessity. And we found many times we’d sign a deal for supply of a component, and then that supplier would find a reason to triple the price. Basically as soon as they thought we didn’t have any way out, then they would start with the conclusion which is ‘triple the price’ and insert reasoning. That’s happened several times. And then we’ve insourced the part to best price, but often with a lot of grief. I’m very pleased with how things are now, but it was very hairy for a couple years there in late 2007 to say the first half of 2009. We came close to not making it.Last question. Is there anyone I’ve been ignoring for a long time? Richard who? laugh No, actually Richard Branson is a friend of mine. He’s a very affable guy. He’s not a technologist. So he’s sort of, his strength is brand and marketing and that sort of thing. He’s very good at that. I think going into the rocket game is tricky, because it’s very much a technology problem. So I think he’s going to encounter some challenges there. Also, what Virgin Galactic is doing is a suborbital flight, which is only about 1.5% of the energy you need to get into orbit. So it is a much simpler problem. Basically you shoot up to about 60-70 miles, and then you fall down. That’s essentially what they’re doing. It’s like the world’s best roller coaster ride. So it’s like a really fun trip, but it’s not a technology path that could ultimately take us off- to other planets, and that kind of thing.But I think for a lot of people there’s not a clear distinction between getting to space and getting to orbit. And space is somewhat of a loose definition, it’s kind of ‘where does the atmosphere get thin?’ And you can sort of define, ‘how thin is thin?’ It’s pretty darn thin at 60 miles altitude, but you can’t have a satellite up there because a satellite would, the orbit would decay very quickly and it would reenter. And going up and staying up is actually about how fast you’re zooming around the Earth. It takes much more energy to do that zooming around the Earth bit than it is to get to altitude. In fact the only reason you need altitude at all is to get out of atmospheric drag. If the Earth had no atmosphere you could be orbiting Earth at an inch off the ground.So to get to orbit you need at least to go about 25 times the speed of sound for Earth, and the energy required scales with the square of velocity, so that’s say 625 units of energy. To do a suborbital flight such as what Virgin Galactic is talking about you need maybe about Mach 3, which is 9 units of energy. So it’s a pretty huge difference. And then if you want to reenter, you have to burn off 625 units of energy, or burn off 9 units of energy. So it’s just a giant difference.So alright, thank you